     WileyPLUS builds students’ confidence because it takes the guesswork
            out of studying by providing students with a clear roadmap:
 It offers interactive resources along with a complete digital textbook that help
students learn more. With WileyPLUS, students take more initiative so you’ll have
        greater impact on their achievement in the classroom and beyond.
  LL THE HELP, RESOURCES, AND PERSONAL
SUPPORT YOU AND YOUR STUDENTS NEED!
 -Minute Tutorials and all      Student support from an    Collaborate with your colleagues,
the resources you and your      experienced student user find a mentor, attend virtual and live
udents need to get started                                    events, and view resources
                                                         www.WhereFacultyConnect.com
Pre-loaded, ready-to-use         Technical Support 24/7
 gnments and presentations         FAQs, online chat,      Your WileyPLUS Account Manager,
 ed by subject matter experts      and phone support          providing personal training
                              www.wileyplus.com/support               and support
Elementary Differential
Equations and Boundary
Value Problems
T E N T H EDITION
Elementary Differential
  Equations and
  Boundary Value
  Problems
         William E. Boyce
         Edward P. Hamilton Professor Emeritus
         Richard C. DiPrima
         formerly Eliza Ricketts Foundation Professor
         Department of Mathematical Sciences
         Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
PUBLISHER                                         Laurie Rosatone
ACQUISITIONS EDITOR                               David Dietz
MARKETING MANAGER                                 Melanie Kurkjian
SENIOR EDITORIAL ASSISTANT                        Jacqueline Sinacori
FREELANCE DEVELOPMENT EDITOR                      Anne Scanlan-Rohrer
SENIOR PRODUCTION EDITOR                          Kerry Weinstein
SENIOR CONTENT MANAGER                            Karoline Luciano
SENIOR DESIGNER                                   Madelyn Lesure
SENIOR PRODUCT DESIGNER                           Tom Kulesa
EDITORIAL OPERATIONS MANAGER                      Melissa Edwards
ASSOCIATE CONTENT EDITOR                          Beth Pearson
MEDIA SPECIALIST                                  Laura Abrams
ASSISTANT MEDIA EDITOR                            Courtney Welsh
PRODUCTION SERVICES                               Carol Sawyer/The Perfect Proof
COVER ART                                         Norm Christiansen
This book was set in Times Ten by MPS Limited, Chennai, India and printed and bound by R.R.
Donnelley/ Willard. The cover was printed by R.R. Donnelley / Willard.
This book is printed on acid free paper. ∞
The paper in this book was manufactured by a mill whose forest management programs include
sustained yield harvesting of its timberlands. Sustained yield harvesting principles ensure that the
numbers of trees cut each year does not exceed the amount of new growth.
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Sections 107 and 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee
to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400,
fax (978) 750-4470. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011,
fax (201) 748-6008, E-mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM. To order books or for customer service,
call 1 (800)-CALL-WILEY (225-5945).
ISBN 978-0-470-45831-0
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
   To Elsa and in loving memory of Maureen
To Siobhan, James, Richard, Jr., Carolyn, and Ann
            And to the next generation:
 Charles, Aidan, Stephanie, Veronica, and Deirdre
The Authors
           William E. Boyce received his B.A. degree in Mathematics from Rhodes College,
           and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Mathematics from Carnegie-Mellon University.
           He is a member of the American Mathematical Society, the Mathematical Associ-
           ation of America, and the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. He is
           currently the Edward P. Hamilton Distinguished Professor Emeritus of Science Ed-
           ucation (Department of Mathematical Sciences) at Rensselaer. He is the author
           of numerous technical papers in boundary value problems and random differential
           equations and their applications. He is the author of several textbooks including
           two differential equations texts, and is the coauthor (with M.H. Holmes, J.G. Ecker,
           and W.L. Siegmann) of a text on using Maple to explore Calculus. He is also coau-
           thor (with R.L. Borrelli and C.S. Coleman) of Differential Equations Laboratory
           Workbook (Wiley 1992), which received the EDUCOM Best Mathematics Curricu-
           lar Innovation Award in 1993. Professor Boyce was a member of the NSF-sponsored
           CODEE (Consortium for Ordinary Differential Equations Experiments) that led to
           the widely-acclaimed ODE Architect. He has also been active in curriculum inno-
           vation and reform. Among other things, he was the initiator of the “Computers in
           Calculus” project at Rensselaer, partially supported by the NSF. In 1991 he received
           the William H. Wiley Distinguished Faculty Award given by Rensselaer.
           Richard C. DiPrima (deceased) received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in
           Mathematics from Carnegie-Mellon University. He joined the faculty of Rensselaer
           Polytechnic Institute after holding research positions at MIT, Harvard, and Hughes
           Aircraft. He held the Eliza Ricketts Foundation Professorship of Mathematics at
           Rensselaer, was a fellow of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, the
           American Academy of Mechanics, and the American Physical Society. He was also
           a member of the American Mathematical Society, the Mathematical Association of
           America, and the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. He served as the
           Chairman of the Department of Mathematical Sciences at Rensselaer, as President
           of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, and as Chairman of the Ex-
           ecutive Committee of the Applied Mechanics Division of ASME. In 1980, he was the
           recipient of the William H. Wiley Distinguished Faculty Award given by Rensselaer.
           He received Fulbright fellowships in 1964–65 and 1983 and a Guggenheim fellow-
           ship in 1982–83. He was the author of numerous technical papers in hydrodynamic
           stability and lubrication theory and two texts on differential equations and boundary
           value problems. Professor DiPrima died on September 10, 1984.
P R E FAC E
        This edition, like its predecessors, is written from the viewpoint of the applied
        mathematician, whose interest in differential equations may be sometimes quite
        theoretical, sometimes intensely practical, and often somewhere in between. We
        have sought to combine a sound and accurate (but not abstract) exposition of the
        elementary theory of differential equations with considerable material on methods
        of solution, analysis, and approximation that have proved useful in a wide variety of
        applications.
           The book is written primarily for undergraduate students of mathematics, science,
        or engineering, who typically take a course on differential equations during their
        first or second year of study. The main prerequisite for reading the book is a working
        knowledge of calculus, gained from a normal two- or three-semester course sequence
        or its equivalent. Some familiarity with matrices will also be helpful in the chapters
        on systems of differential equations.
           To be widely useful, a textbook must be adaptable to a variety of instructional
        strategies. This implies at least two things. First, instructors should have maximum
        flexibility to choose both the particular topics they wish to cover and the order in
        which they want to cover them. Second, the book should be useful to students who
        have access to a wide range of technological capability.
           With respect to content, we provide this flexibility by making sure that, so far as
        possible, individual chapters are independent of each other. Thus, after the basic
        parts of the first three chapters are completed (roughly Sections 1.1 through 1.3, 2.1
        through 2.5, and 3.1 through 3.5), the selection of additional topics, and the order and
        depth in which they are covered, are at the discretion of the instructor. Chapters 4
        through 11 are essentially independent of each other, except that Chapter 7 should
        precede Chapter 9 and that Chapter 10 should precede Chapter 11. This means that
        there are multiple pathways through the book, and many different combinations
        have been used effectively with earlier editions.
                                                                                              ix
   With respect to technology, we note repeatedly in the text that computers are ex-
tremely useful for investigating differential equations and their solutions, and many
of the problems are best approached with computational assistance. Nevertheless,
the book is adaptable to courses having various levels of computer involvement,
ranging from little or none to intensive. The text is independent of any particular
hardware platform or software package.
   Many problems are marked with the symbol           to indicate that we consider them
to be technologically intensive. Computers have at least three important uses in a
differential equations course. The first is simply to crunch numbers, thereby gen-
erating accurate numerical approximations to solutions. The second is to carry out
symbolic manipulations that would be tedious and time-consuming to do by hand.
Finally, and perhaps most important of all, is the ability to translate the results of
numerical or symbolic computations into graphical form, so that the behavior of
solutions can be easily visualized. The marked problems typically involve one or
more of these features. Naturally, the designation of a problem as technologically
intensive is a somewhat subjective judgment, and the         is intended only as a guide.
Many of the marked problems can be solved, at least in part, without computa-
tional help, and a computer can also be used effectively on many of the unmarked
problems.
   From a student’s point of view, the problems that are assigned as homework and
that appear on examinations drive the course. We believe that the most outstanding
feature of this book is the number, and above all the variety and range, of the prob-
lems that it contains. Many problems are entirely straightforward, but many others
are more challenging, and some are fairly open-ended and can even serve as the basis
for independent student projects. There are far more problems than any instructor
can use in any given course, and this provides instructors with a multitude of choices
in tailoring their course to meet their own goals and the needs of their students.
   The motivation for solving many differential equations is the desire to learn some-
thing about an underlying physical process that the equation is believed to model.
It is basic to the importance of differential equations that even the simplest equa-
tions correspond to useful physical models, such as exponential growth and decay,
spring–mass systems, or electrical circuits. Gaining an understanding of a complex
natural process is usually accomplished by combining or building upon simpler and
more basic models. Thus a thorough knowledge of these basic models, the equations
that describe them, and their solutions is the first and indispensable step toward the
solution of more complex and realistic problems. We describe the modeling process
in detail in Sections 1.1, 1.2, and 2.3. Careful constructions of models appear also in
Sections 2.5 and 3.7 and in the appendices to Chapter 10. Differential equations re-
sulting from the modeling process appear frequently throughout the book, especially
in the problem sets.
   The main reason for including fairly extensive material on applications and math-
ematical modeling in a book on differential equations is to persuade students that
mathematical modeling often leads to differential equations, and that differential
equations are part of an investigation of problems in a wide variety of other fields.
We also emphasize the transportability of mathematical knowledge: once you mas-
ter a particular solution method, you can use it in any field of application in which an
appropriate differential equation arises. Once these points are convincingly made,
we believe that it is unnecessary to provide specific applications of every method
of solution or type of equation that we consider. This helps to keep this book to
a reasonable size, and in any case, there is only a limited time in most differential
equations courses to discuss modeling and applications.
   Nonroutine problems often require the use of a variety of tools, both analytical
and numerical. Paper-and-pencil methods must often be combined with effective
use of a computer. Quantitative results and graphs, often produced by a computer,
serve to illustrate and clarify conclusions that may be obscured by complicated ana-
lytical expressions. On the other hand, the implementation of an efficient numerical
procedure typically rests on a good deal of preliminary analysis—to determine the
qualitative features of the solution as a guide to computation, to investigate limit-
ing or special cases, or to discover which ranges of the variables or parameters may
require or merit special attention. Thus, a student should come to realize that investi-
gating a difficult problem may well require both analysis and computation; that good
judgment may be required to determine which tool is best suited for a particular task;
and that results can often be presented in a variety of forms.
   We believe that it is important for students to understand that (except perhaps
in courses on differential equations) the goal of solving a differential equation is
seldom simply to obtain the solution. Rather, we seek the solution in order to obtain
insight into the behavior of the process that the equation purports to model. In
other words, the solution is not an end in itself. Thus, we have included in the text
a great many problems, as well as some examples, that call for conclusions to be
drawn about the solution. Sometimes this takes the form of finding the value of the
independent variable at which the solution has a certain property, or determining
the long-term behavior of the solution. Other problems ask for the effect of variations
in a parameter, or for the determination of a critical value of a parameter at which
the solution experiences a substantial change. Such problems are typical of those
that arise in the applications of differential equations, and, depending on the goals
of the course, an instructor has the option of assigning few or many of these problems.
   Readers familiar with the preceding edition will observe that the general structure
of the book is unchanged. The revisions that we have made in this edition are in
many cases the result of suggestions from users of earlier editions. The goals are
to improve the clarity and readability of our presentation of basic material about
differential equations and their applications. More specifically, the most important
revisions include the following:
1.  Sections 8.5 and 8.6 have been interchanged, so that the more advanced topics appear at
    the end of the chapter.
2.  Derivations and proofs in several chapters have been expanded or rewritten to provide
    more details.
3.  The fact that the real and imaginary parts of a complex solution of a real problem are also
    solutions now appears as a theorem in Sections 3.2 and 7.4.
4.  The treatment of generalized eigenvectors in Section 7.8 has been expanded both in the
    text and in the problems.
5.  There are about twenty new or revised problems scattered throughout the book.
6.  There are new examples in Sections 2.1, 3.8, and 7.5.
7.  About a dozen figures have been modified, mainly by using color to make the essen-
    tial feature of the figure more prominent. In addition, numerous captions have been
    expanded to clarify the purpose of the figure without requiring a search of the
    surrounding text.
8. There are several new historical footnotes, and some others have been expanded.
  The authors have found differential equations to be a never-ending source of in-
teresting, and sometimes surprising, results and phenomena. We hope that users of
this book, both students and instructors, will share our enthusiasm for the subject.
William E. Boyce
Grafton, New York
March 13, 2012
Supplemental Resources for Instructors and Students
              An Instructor’s Solutions Manual, ISBN 978-0-470-45834-1, includes solutions for all
              problems not contained in the Student Solutions Manual.
                 A Student Solutions Manual, ISBN 978-0-470-45833-4, includes solutions for se-
              lected problems in the text.
                 A Book Companion Site, www.wiley.com/college/boyce, provides a wealth of re-
              sources for students and instructors, including
                 • PowerPoint slides of important definitions, examples, and theorems from the
                   book, as well as graphics for presentation in lectures or for study and note taking.
                 • Chapter Review Sheets, which enable students to test their knowledge of key
                   concepts. For further review, diagnostic feedback is provided that refers to per-
                   tinent sections in the text.
                 • Mathematica, Maple, and MATLAB data files for selected problems in the text
                   providing opportunities for further exploration of important concepts.
                 • Projects  that deal with extended problems normally not included among tradi-
                   tional topics in differential equations, many involving applications from a variety
                   of disciplines. These vary in length and complexity, and they can be assigned as
                   individual homework or as group assignments.
              A series of supplemental guidebooks, also published by John Wiley & Sons, can be
              used with Boyce/DiPrima in order to incorporate computing technologies into the
              course. These books emphasize numerical methods and graphical analysis, showing
              how these methods enable us to interpret solutions of ordinary differential equa-
              tions (ODEs) in the real world. Separate guidebooks cover each of the three major
              mathematical software formats, but the ODE subject matter is the same in each.
                 • Hunt, Lipsman, Osborn, and Rosenberg, Differential Equations with MATLAB,
                   3rd ed., 2012, ISBN 978-1-118-37680-5
                 • Hunt, Lardy, Lipsman, Osborn, and Rosenberg, Differential Equations with
                   Maple, 3rd ed., 2008, ISBN 978-0-471-77317-7
                 • Hunt, Outing, Lipsman, Osborn, and Rosenberg, Differential Equations with
                   Mathematica, 3rd ed., 2009, ISBN 978-0-471-77316-0
WileyPLUS
              WileyPLUS is an innovative, research-based online environment for effective teach-
              ing and learning.
                 WileyPLUS builds students’ confidence because it takes the guesswork out of
              studying by providing students with a clear roadmap: what to do, how to do it, if they
              did it right. Students will take more initiative so you’ll have greater impact on their
              achievement in the classroom and beyond.
                 WileyPLUS, is loaded with all of the supplements above, and it also features
                 • The E-book, which is an exact version of the print text but also features hyper-
                   links to questions, definitions, and supplements for quicker and easier support.
• Guided Online (GO) Exercises, which prompt students to build solutions step-
  by-step. Rather than simply grading an exercise answer as wrong, GO problems
  show students precisely where they are making a mistake.
• Homework management tools, which enable instructors easily to assign and
  grade questions, as well as to gauge student comprehension.
• QuickStart pre-designed reading and homework assignments. Use them as is,
  or customize them to fit the needs of your classroom.
• Interactive Demonstrations, based on figures from the text, which help reinforce
  and deepen understanding of the key concepts of differential equations. Use
  them in class or assign them as homework. Worksheets are provided to help
  guide and structure the experience of mastering these concepts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
     It is a pleasure to express my appreciation to the many people who have generously
     assisted in various ways in the preparation of this book.
        To the individuals listed below, who reviewed the manuscript and/or provided
     valuable suggestions for its improvement:
        Vincent Bonini, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo
        Fengxin Chen, University of Texas San Antonio
        Carmen Chicone, University of Missouri
        Matthew Fahy, Northern Arizona University
        Isaac Goldbring, University of California at Los Angeles
        Anton Gorodetski, University of California Irvine
        Mansoor Haider, North Carolina State University
        David Handron, Carnegie Mellon University
        Thalia D. Jeffres, Wichita State University
        Akhtar Khan, Rochester Institute of Technology
        Joseph Koebbe, Utah State University
        Ilya Kudish, Kettering University
        Tong Li, University of Iowa
        Wen-Xiu Ma, University of South Florida
        Aldo Manfroi, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
        Will Murray, California State University Long Beach
        Harold R. Parks, Oregon State University
        William Paulsen, Arkansas State University
        Shagi-Di Shih, University of Wyoming
        John Starrett, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
        David S. Torain II, Hampton University
        George Yates, Youngstown State University
        Nung Kwan (Aaron) Yip, Purdue University
        Yue Zhao, University of Central Florida
                                                                                    xv
   To my colleagues and students at Rensselaer, whose suggestions and reactions
through the years have done much to sharpen my knowledge of differential equa-
tions, as well as my ideas on how to present the subject.
   To those readers of the preceding edition who called errors or omissions to my
attention.
   To Tamas Wiandt (Rochester Institute of Technology), who is primarily responsi-
ble for the revision of the Instructor’s Solutions Manual and the Student Solutions
Manual, and to Charles Haines (Rochester Institute of Technology), who assisted in
this undertaking.
   To Tom Polaski (Winthrop University), who checked the answers in the back of
the text and the Instructor’s Solutions Manual for accuracy.
   To David Ryeburn (Simon Fraser University), who carefully checked the entire
manuscript and page proofs at least four times and is responsible for many corrections
and clarifications.
   To Douglas Meade (University of South Carolina), who gave indispensable assis-
tance in a variety of ways: by reading the entire manuscript at an early stage and
offering numerous suggestions; by materially assisting in expanding the historical
footnotes and updating the references; and by assuming the primary responsibility
for checking the accuracy of the page proofs.
   To the editorial and production staff of John Wiley & Sons, who have always been
ready to offer assistance and have displayed the highest standards of professionalism.
   Finally, and most important, to my wife Elsa for discussing questions both math-
ematical and stylistic, and above all for her unfailing support and encouragement
during the revision process. In a very real sense, this book is a joint product.
William E. Boyce
CONTENTS
  Chapter 1 Introduction   1
            1.1   Some Basic Mathematical Models; Direction Fields     1
            1.2   Solutions of Some Differential Equations 10
            1.3   Classification of Differential Equations 19
            1.4   Historical Remarks 26
  Chapter 2 First Order Differential Equations    31
            2.1   Linear Equations; Method of Integrating Factors 31
            2.2   Separable Equations 42
            2.3   Modeling with First Order Equations 51
            2.4   Differences Between Linear and Nonlinear Equations 68
            2.5   Autonomous Equations and Population Dynamics 78
            2.6   Exact Equations and Integrating Factors 95
            2.7   Numerical Approximations: Euler’s Method 102
            2.8   The Existence and Uniqueness Theorem 112
            2.9   First Order Difference Equations 122
  Chapter 3 Second Order Linear Equations       137
            3.1   Homogeneous Equations with Constant Coefficients 137
            3.2   Solutions of Linear Homogeneous Equations; the Wronskian 145
            3.3   Complex Roots of the Characteristic Equation 158
            3.4   Repeated Roots; Reduction of Order 167
            3.5   Nonhomogeneous Equations; Method of Undetermined Coefficients 175
            3.6   Variation of Parameters 186
            3.7   Mechanical and Electrical Vibrations 192
            3.8   Forced Vibrations 207
  Chapter 4 Higher Order Linear Equations       221
            4.1   General Theory of nth Order Linear Equations 221
            4.2   Homogeneous Equations with Constant Coefficients 228
            4.3   The Method of Undetermined Coefficients 236
            4.4   The Method of Variation of Parameters 241
  Chapter 5 Series Solutions of Second Order Linear Equations     247
            5.1   Review of Power Series 247
            5.2   Series Solutions Near an Ordinary Point, Part I  254
                                                                                 xvii
          5.3  Series Solutions Near an Ordinary Point, Part II 265
          5.4  Euler Equations; Regular Singular Points 272
          5.5  Series Solutions Near a Regular Singular Point, Part I 282
          5.6  Series Solutions Near a Regular Singular Point, Part II 288
          5.7  Bessel’s Equation 296
Chapter 6 The Laplace Transform      309
          6.1  Definition of the Laplace Transform 309
          6.2  Solution of Initial Value Problems 317
          6.3  Step Functions 327
          6.4  Differential Equations with Discontinuous Forcing Functions  336
          6.5  Impulse Functions 343
          6.6  The Convolution Integral 350
Chapter 7 Systems of First Order Linear Equations   359
          7.1  Introduction 359
          7.2  Review of Matrices 368
          7.3  Systems of Linear Algebraic Equations; Linear Independence, Eigenvalues,
               Eigenvectors 378
          7.4  Basic Theory of Systems of First Order Linear Equations 390
          7.5  Homogeneous Linear Systems with Constant Coefficients 396
          7.6  Complex Eigenvalues 408
          7.7  Fundamental Matrices 421
          7.8  Repeated Eigenvalues 429
          7.9  Nonhomogeneous Linear Systems 440
Chapter 8 Numerical Methods      451
          8.1  The Euler or Tangent Line Method 451
          8.2  Improvements on the Euler Method 462
          8.3  The Runge–Kutta Method 468
          8.4  Multistep Methods 472
          8.5  Systems of First Order Equations 478
          8.6  More on Errors; Stability 482
Chapter 9 Nonlinear Differential Equations and Stability  495
          9.1  The Phase Plane: Linear Systems 495
          9.2  Autonomous Systems and Stability 508
          9.3  Locally Linear Systems 519
          9.4  Competing Species 531
          9.5  Predator–Prey Equations 544
           9.6   Liapunov’s Second Method 554
           9.7   Periodic Solutions and Limit Cycles 565
           9.8   Chaos and Strange Attractors: The Lorenz Equations   577
Chapter 10 Partial Differential Equations and Fourier Series 589
           10.1 Two-Point Boundary Value Problems 589
           10.2 Fourier Series 596
           10.3 The Fourier Convergence Theorem 607
           10.4 Even and Odd Functions 614
           10.5 Separation of Variables; Heat Conduction in a Rod 623
           10.6 Other Heat Conduction Problems 632
           10.7 The Wave Equation: Vibrations of an Elastic String 643
           10.8 Laplace’s Equation 658
                 Appendix A Derivation of the Heat Conduction Equation    669
                 Appendix B Derivation of the Wave Equation 673
Chapter 11 Boundary Value Problems and Sturm–Liouville Theory      677
           11.1 The Occurrence of Two-Point Boundary Value Problems 677
           11.2 Sturm–Liouville Boundary Value Problems 685
           11.3 Nonhomogeneous Boundary Value Problems 699
           11.4 Singular Sturm–Liouville Problems 714
           11.5 Further Remarks on the Method of Separation of Variables: A Bessel
                 Series Expansion 721
           11.6 Series of Orthogonal Functions: Mean Convergence 728
           Answers to Problems     739
           Index 799
 CHAPTER
     1
               Introduction
               In this chapter we give perspective to your study of differential equations in several
               different ways. First, we use two problems to illustrate some of the basic ideas that we
               will return to, and elaborate upon, frequently throughout the remainder of the book.
               Later, to provide organizational structure for the book, we indicate several ways
               of classifying differential equations. Finally, we outline some of the major trends
               in the historical development of the subject and mention a few of the outstanding
               mathematicians who have contributed to it. The study of differential equations has
               attracted the attention of many of the world’s greatest mathematicians during the
               past three centuries. Nevertheless, it remains a dynamic field of inquiry today, with
               many interesting open questions.
1.1 Some Basic Mathematical Models; Direction Fields
               Before embarking on a serious study of differential equations (for example, by read-
               ing this book or major portions of it), you should have some idea of the possible
               benefits to be gained by doing so. For some students the intrinsic interest of the
               subject itself is enough motivation, but for most it is the likelihood of important
               applications to other fields that makes the undertaking worthwhile.
                  Many of the principles, or laws, underlying the behavior of the natural world are
               statements or relations involving rates at which things happen. When expressed
               in mathematical terms, the relations are equations and the rates are derivatives.
               Equations containing derivatives are differential equations. Therefore, to understand
               and to investigate problems involving the motion of fluids, the flow of current in elec-
               tric circuits, the dissipation of heat in solid objects, the propagation and detection of
                                                                                                       1
               seismic waves, or the increase or decrease of populations, among many others, it is
               necessary to know something about differential equations.
                  A differential equation that describes some physical process is often called a math-
               ematical model of the process, and many such models are discussed throughout this
               book. In this section we begin with two models leading to equations that are easy to
               solve. It is noteworthy that even the simplest differential equations provide useful
               models of important physical processes.
               Suppose that an object is falling in the atmosphere near sea level. Formulate a differential
EXAMPLE        equation that describes the motion.
   1              We begin by introducing letters to represent various quantities that may be of interest in this
               problem. The motion takes place during a certain time interval, so let us use t to denote time.
A Fa l l i n g Also, let us use v to represent the velocity of the falling object. The velocity will presumably
 Object        change with time, so we think of v as a function of t; in other words, t is the independent
               variable and v is the dependent variable. The choice of units of measurement is somewhat
               arbitrary, and there is nothing in the statement of the problem to suggest appropriate units,
               so we are free to make any choice that seems reasonable. To be specific, let us measure time
               t in seconds and velocity v in meters/second. Further, we will assume that v is positive in the
               downward direction—that is, when the object is falling.
                  The physical law that governs the motion of objects is Newton’s second law, which states
               that the mass of the object times its acceleration is equal to the net force on the object. In
               mathematical terms this law is expressed by the equation
                                                             F = ma,                                           (1)
               where m is the mass of the object, a is its acceleration, and F is the net force exerted on the
               object. To keep our units consistent, we will measure m in kilograms, a in meters/second2 , and
               F in newtons. Of course, a is related to v by a = dv/dt, so we can rewrite Eq. (1) in the form
                                                         F = m(dv/dt).                                         (2)
                  Next, consider the forces that act on the object as it falls. Gravity exerts a force equal to
               the weight of the object, or mg, where g is the acceleration due to gravity. In the units we have
               chosen, g has been determined experimentally to be approximately equal to 9.8 m/s2 near
               the earth’s surface. There is also a force due to air resistance, or drag, that is more difficult to
               model. This is not the place for an extended discussion of the drag force; suffice it to say that it
               is often assumed that the drag is proportional to the velocity, and we will make that assumption
               here. Thus the drag force has the magnitude γv, where γ is a constant called the drag coefficient.
               The numerical value of the drag coefficient varies widely from one object to another; smooth
               streamlined objects have much smaller drag coefficients than rough blunt ones. The physical
               units for γ are mass/time, or kg/s for this problem; if these units seem peculiar, remember that
               γv must have the units of force, namely, kg·m/s2 .
                  In writing an expression for the net force F, we need to remember that gravity always acts
               in the downward (positive) direction, whereas, for a falling object, drag acts in the upward
               (negative) direction, as shown in Figure 1.1.1. Thus
                                                          F = mg − γv                                          (3)
               and Eq. (2) then becomes
                                                          dv
                                                        m     = mg − γv.                                       (4)
                                                           dt
               Equation (4) is a mathematical model of an object falling in the atmosphere near sea level.
               Note that the model contains the three constants m, g, and γ. The constants m and γ depend
                very much on the particular object that is falling, and they are usually different for different
                objects. It is common to refer to them as parameters, since they may take on a range of values
                during the course of an experiment. On the other hand, g is a physical constant, whose value
                is the same for all objects.
                                                                  γυ
                                                                   m
                                                                  mg
                               FIGURE 1.1.1      Free-body diagram of the forces on a falling object.
                   To solve Eq. (4), we need to find a function v = v(t) that satisfies the equation. It
                is not hard to do this, and we will show you how in the next section. For the present,
                however, let us see what we can learn about solutions without actually finding any of
                them. Our task is simplified slightly if we assign numerical values to m and γ, but the
                procedure is the same regardless of which values we choose. So, let us suppose that
                m = 10 kg and γ = 2 kg/s. Then Eq. (4) can be rewritten as
                                                           dv            v
                                                               = 9.8 − .                                           (5)
                                                           dt            5
                Investigate the behavior of solutions of Eq. (5) without solving the differential equation.
 EXAMPLE            First let us consider what information can be obtained directly from the differential equation
     2          itself. Suppose that the velocity v has a certain given value. Then, by evaluating the right side of
                Eq. (5), we can find the corresponding value of dv/dt. For instance, if v = 40, then dv/dt = 1.8.
 A Fa l l i n g This means that the slope of a solution v = v(t) has the value 1.8 at any point where v = 40.
  Object        We can display this information graphically in the tv-plane by drawing short line segments
(continued)     with slope 1.8 at several points on the line v = 40. Similarly, if v = 50, then dv/dt = −0.2, so
                we draw line segments with slope −0.2 at several points on the line v = 50. We obtain Figure
                1.1.2 by proceeding in the same way with other values of v. Figure 1.1.2 is an example of what
                is called a direction field or sometimes a slope field.
                    Remember that a solution of Eq. (5) is a function v = v(t) whose graph is a curve in the
                tv-plane. The importance of Figure 1.1.2 is that each line segment is a tangent line to one
                of these solution curves. Thus, even though we have not found any solutions, and no graphs of
                solutions appear in the figure, we can nonetheless draw some qualitative conclusions about
                the behavior of solutions. For instance, if v is less than a certain critical value, then all the line
                segments have positive slopes, and the speed of the falling object increases as it falls. On the
                other hand, if v is greater than the critical value, then the line segments have negative slopes,
                and the falling object slows down as it falls. What is this critical value of v that separates objects
                whose speed is increasing from those whose speed is decreasing? Referring again to Eq. (5),
                we ask what value of v will cause dv/dt to be zero. The answer is v = (5)(9.8) = 49 m/s.
                    In fact, the constant function v(t) = 49 is a solution of Eq. (5). To verify this statement,
                substitute v(t) = 49 into Eq. (5) and observe that each side of the equation is zero. Because
                it does not change with time, the solution v(t) = 49 is called an equilibrium solution. It is
                the solution that corresponds to a perfect balance between gravity and drag. In Figure 1.1.3
we show the equilibrium solution v(t) = 49 superimposed on the direction field. From this
figure we can draw another conclusion, namely, that all other solutions seem to be converging
to the equilibrium solution as t increases. Thus, in this context, the equilibrium solution is often
called the terminal velocity.
               υ
              60
              56
              52
              48
              44
              40
                              2            4              6            8           10    t
               FIGURE 1.1.2 A direction field for Eq. (5): dv/dt = 9.8 − (v/5).
               υ
              60
              56
              52
              48
              44
              40
                              2            4              6            8           10    t
  FIGURE 1.1.3      Direction field and equilibrium solution for Eq. (5): dv/dt = 9.8 − (v/5).
   The approach illustrated in Example 2 can be applied equally well to the more
general Eq. (4), where the parameters m and γ are unspecified positive numbers.
The results are essentially identical to those of Example 2. The equilibrium solution
of Eq. (4) is v(t) = mg/γ. Solutions below the equilibrium solution increase with time,
those above it decrease with time, and all other solutions approach the equilibrium
solution as t becomes large.
Direction Fields. Direction fields are valuable tools in studying the solutions of
differential equations of the form
                                            dy
                                                = f (t, y),                           (6)
                                            dt
where f is a given function of the two variables t and y, sometimes referred to as the
rate function. A direction field for equations of the form (6) can be constructed by
evaluating f at each point of a rectangular grid. At each point of the grid, a short line
segment is drawn whose slope is the value of f at that point. Thus each line segment
is tangent to the graph of the solution passing through that point. A direction field
drawn on a fairly fine grid gives a good picture of the overall behavior of solutions of
a differential equation. Usually a grid consisting of a few hundred points is sufficient.
The construction of a direction field is often a useful first step in the investigation of
a differential equation.
   Two observations are worth particular mention. First, in constructing a direction
field, we do not have to solve Eq. (6); we just have to evaluate the given function
f (t, y) many times. Thus direction fields can be readily constructed even for equations
that may be quite difficult to solve. Second, repeated evaluation of a given function
is a task for which a computer is well suited, and you should usually use a computer
to draw a direction field. All the direction fields shown in this book, such as the one
in Figure 1.1.2, were computer-generated.
Field Mice and Owls. Now let us look at another, quite different example. Consider
a population of field mice who inhabit a certain rural area. In the absence of
predators we assume that the mouse population increases at a rate proportional
to the current population. This assumption is not a well-established physical law
(as Newton’s law of motion is in Example 1), but it is a common initial hypothesis1
in a study of population growth. If we denote time by t and the mouse population by
p(t), then the assumption about population growth can be expressed by the equation
                                              dp
                                                   = rp,                              (7)
                                              dt
where the proportionality factor r is called the rate constant or growth rate. To be
specific, suppose that time is measured in months and that the rate constant r has the
value 0.5/month. Then each term in Eq. (7) has the units of mice/month.
   Now let us add to the problem by supposing that several owls live in the same
neighborhood and that they kill 15 field mice per day. To incorporate this information
into the model, we must add another term to the differential equation (7), so that it
becomes
                                         dp
                                             = 0.5p − 450.                            (8)
                                         dt
Observe that the predation term is −450 rather than −15 because time is measured
in months, so the monthly predation rate is needed.
1A better model of population growth is discussed in Section 2.5.
        Investigate the solutions of Eq. (8) graphically.
EXAMPLE    A direction field for Eq. (8) is shown in Figure 1.1.4. For sufficiently large values of p it can
   3    be seen from the figure, or directly from Eq. (8) itself, that dp/dt is positive, so that solutions
        increase. On the other hand, if p is small, then dp/dt is negative and solutions decrease. Again,
        the critical value of p that separates solutions that increase from those that decrease is the
        value of p for which dp/dt is zero. By setting dp/dt equal to zero in Eq. (8) and then solving
        for p, we find the equilibrium solution p(t) = 900, for which the growth term and the predation
        term in Eq. (8) are exactly balanced. The equilibrium solution is also shown in Figure 1.1.4.
                       p
                   1000
                     950
                     900
                     850
                     800
                                      1             2            3           4             5   t
          FIGURE 1.1.4      Direction field and equilibrium solution for Eq. (8): dp/dt = 0.5p − 450.
           Comparing Examples 2 and 3, we note that in both cases the equilibrium solution
        separates increasing from decreasing solutions. In Example 2 other solutions con-
        verge to, or are attracted by, the equilibrium solution, so that after the object falls far
        enough, an observer will see it moving at very nearly the equilibrium velocity. On
        the other hand, in Example 3 other solutions diverge from, or are repelled by, the
        equilibrium solution. Solutions behave very differently depending on whether they
        start above or below the equilibrium solution. As time passes, an observer might see
        populations either much larger or much smaller than the equilibrium population, but
        the equilibrium solution itself will not, in practice, be observed. In both problems,
        however, the equilibrium solution is very important in understanding how solutions
        of the given differential equation behave.
           A more general version of Eq. (8) is
                                                  dp
                                                       = rp − k,                                       (9)
                                                  dt
        where the growth rate r and the predation rate k are unspecified. Solutions of this
        more general equation are very similar to those of Eq. (8). The equilibrium solution
        of Eq. (9) is p(t) = k/r. Solutions above the equilibrium solution increase, while
        those below it decrease.
           You should keep in mind that both of the models discussed in this section have
        their limitations. The model (5) of the falling object is valid only as long as the
         object is falling freely, without encountering any obstacles. The population model
         (8) eventually predicts negative numbers of mice (if p < 900) or enormously large
         numbers (if p > 900). Both of these predictions are unrealistic, so this model becomes
         unacceptable after a fairly short time interval.
         Constructing Mathematical Models. In applying differential equations to any of the
         numerous fields in which they are useful, it is necessary first to formulate the appro-
         priate differential equation that describes, or models, the problem being investigated.
         In this section we have looked at two examples of this modeling process, one drawn
         from physics and the other from ecology. In constructing future mathematical mod-
         els yourself, you should recognize that each problem is different, and that successful
         modeling cannot be reduced to the observance of a set of prescribed rules. Indeed,
         constructing a satisfactory model is sometimes the most difficult part of the problem.
         Nevertheless, it may be helpful to list some steps that are often part of the process:
         1.  Identify the independent and dependent variables and assign letters to represent them.
             Often the independent variable is time.
         2.  Choose the units of measurement for each variable. In a sense the choice of units is
             arbitrary, but some choices may be much more convenient than others. For example, we
             chose to measure time in seconds for the falling-object problem and in months for the
             population problem.
         3.  Articulate the basic principle that underlies or governs the problem you are investigating.
             This may be a widely recognized physical law, such as Newton’s law of motion, or it may be
             a more speculative assumption that may be based on your own experience or observations.
             In any case, this step is likely not to be a purely mathematical one, but will require you to
             be familiar with the field in which the problem originates.
         4.  Express the principle or law in step 3 in terms of the variables you chose in step 1. This
             may be easier said than done. It may require the introduction of physical constants or
             parameters (such as the drag coefficient in Example 1) and the determination of appro-
             priate values for them. Or it may involve the use of auxiliary or intermediate variables
             that must then be related to the primary variables.
         5.  Make sure that all terms in your equation have the same physical units. If this is not the
             case, then your equation is wrong and you should seek to repair it. If the units agree, then
             your equation at least is dimensionally consistent, although it may have other shortcomings
             that this test does not reveal.
         6.  In the problems considered here, the result of step 4 is a single differential equation, which
             constitutes the desired mathematical model. Keep in mind, though, that in more complex
             problems the resulting mathematical model may be much more complicated, perhaps
             involving a system of several differential equations, for example.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, draw a direction field for the given differential equation.
         Based on the direction field, determine the behavior of y as t → ∞. If this behavior depends
         on the initial value of y at t = 0, describe the dependency.
          1. y = 3 − 2y                                    2. y = 2y − 3
              
          3. y = 3 + 2y                                     4. y = −1 − 2y
          5. y = 1 + 2y                                    6. y = y + 2
In each of Problems 7 through 10, write down a differential equation of the form
dy/dt = ay + b whose solutions have the required behavior as t → ∞.
  7. All solutions approach y = 3.                8. All solutions approach y = 2/3.
  9. All other solutions diverge from y = 2.     10. All other solutions diverge from y = 1/3.
In each of Problems 11 through 14, draw a direction field for the given differential equation.
Based on the direction field, determine the behavior of y as t → ∞. If this behavior depends
on the initial value of y at t = 0, describe this dependency. Note that in these problems the
equations are not of the form y = ay + b, and the behavior of their solutions is somewhat
more complicated than for the equations in the text.
11. y = y(4 − y)                                12. y = −y(5 − y)
13. y = y2                                      14. y = y(y − 2)2
Consider the following list of differential equations, some of which produced the direction
fields shown in Figures 1.1.5 through 1.1.10. In each of Problems 15 through 20 identify the
differential equation that corresponds to the given direction field.
(a) y = 2y − 1                       (b) y = 2 + y                      (c) y = y − 2
                                          
(d) y = y(y + 3)                      (e) y = y(y − 3)                    (f) y = 1 + 2y
(g) y = −2 − y                       (h) y = y(3 − y)                   (i) y = 1 − 2y
     
(j) y = 2 − y
15. The direction field of Figure 1.1.5.
16. The direction field of Figure 1.1.6.
 y                                                    y
 4                                                     4
 3                                                     3
 2                                                     2
 1                                                     1
             1        2         3         4 t                    1        2         3       4 t
         FIGURE 1.1.5     Problem 15.                      FIGURE 1.1.6      Problem 16.
17. The direction field of Figure 1.1.7.
18. The direction field of Figure 1.1.8.
  y           1        2         3         4          y          1        2         3       4t
                                             t
–1                                                   –1
–2                                                   –2
–3                                                   –3
–4                                                  –4
         FIGURE 1.1.7     Problem 17.                      FIGURE 1.1.8      Problem 18.
19. The direction field of Figure 1.1.9.
20. The direction field of Figure 1.1.10.
  y                                                    y
  5                                                    5
  4                                                    4
  3                                                    3
  2                                                    2
  1                                                    1
              1         2        3         4t                     1          2         3         4t
–1                                                    –1
        FIGURE 1.1.9       Problem 19.                       FIGURE 1.1.10       Problem 20.
21. A pond initially contains 1,000,000 gal of water and an unknown amount of an undesirable
     chemical. Water containing 0.01 g of this chemical per gallon flows into the pond at a rate
     of 300 gal/h. The mixture flows out at the same rate, so the amount of water in the pond
     remains constant. Assume that the chemical is uniformly distributed throughout the pond.
     (a) Write a differential equation for the amount of chemical in the pond at any time.
     (b) How much of the chemical will be in the pond after a very long time? Does this limiting
     amount depend on the amount that was present initially?
22. A spherical raindrop evaporates at a rate proportional to its surface area. Write a
     differential equation for the volume of the raindrop as a function of time.
23. Newton’s law of cooling states that the temperature of an object changes at a rate propor-
     tional to the difference between the temperature of the object itself and the temperature
     of its surroundings (the ambient air temperature in most cases). Suppose that the ambient
     temperature is 70◦ F and that the rate constant is 0.05 (min)−1 . Write a differential equation
     for the temperature of the object at any time. Note that the differential equation is the
     same whether the temperature of the object is above or below the ambient temperature.
24. A certain drug is being administered intravenously to a hospital patient. Fluid containing
     5 mg/cm3 of the drug enters the patient’s bloodstream at a rate of 100 cm3 /h. The drug is
     absorbed by body tissues or otherwise leaves the bloodstream at a rate proportional to
     the amount present, with a rate constant of 0.4 (h)−1 .
     (a) Assuming that the drug is always uniformly distributed throughout the bloodstream,
     write a differential equation for the amount of the drug that is present in the bloodstream
     at any time.
     (b) How much of the drug is present in the bloodstream after a long time?
25. For small, slowly falling objects, the assumption made in the text that the drag force
     is proportional to the velocity is a good one. For larger, more rapidly falling objects, it is
     more accurate to assume that the drag force is proportional to the square of the velocity.2
     (a) Write a differential equation for the velocity of a falling object of mass m if the mag-
     nitude of the drag force is proportional to the square of the velocity and its direction is
     opposite to that of the velocity.
2 See Lyle N. Long and Howard Weiss, “The Velocity Dependence of Aerodynamic Drag: A Primer for
Mathematicians,” American Mathematical Monthly 106 (1999), 2, pp. 127–135.
                         (b) Determine the limiting velocity after a long time.
                         (c) If m = 10 kg, find the drag coefficient so that the limiting velocity is 49 m/s.
                         (d) Using the data in part (c), draw a direction field and compare it with Figure 1.1.3.
                    In each of Problems 26 through 33, draw a direction field for the given differential equation.
                    Based on the direction field, determine the behavior of y as t → ∞. If this behavior depends
                    on the initial value of y at t = 0, describe this dependency. Note that the right sides of these
                    equations depend on t as well as y; therefore, their solutions can exhibit more complicated
                    behavior than those in the text.
                    26. y = −2 + t − y                               27. y = te−2t − 2y
                    28. y = e−t + y                                  29. y = t + 2y
                           
                    30. y = 3 sin t + 1 + y                           31. y = 2t − 1 − y2
                           
                    32. y = −(2t + y)/2y                              33. y = 16 y3 − y − 13 t 2
1.2 Solutions of Some Differential Equations
                    In the preceding section we derived the differential equations
                                                               dv
                                                            m      = mg − γv                                      (1)
                                                               dt
                    and
                                                              dp
                                                                  = rp − k.                                       (2)
                                                               dt
                    Equation (1) models a falling object, and Eq. (2) models a population of field mice
                    preyed on by owls. Both of these equations are of the general form
                                                              dy
                                                                  = ay − b,                                       (3)
                                                               dt
                    where a and b are given constants. We were able to draw some important qualitative
                    conclusions about the behavior of solutions of Eqs. (1) and (2) by considering the
                    associated direction fields. To answer questions of a quantitative nature, however, we
                    need to find the solutions themselves, and we now investigate how to do that.
                    Consider the equation
   EXAMPLE                                                   dp
                                                                 = 0.5p − 450,                                    (4)
          1                                                  dt
                    which describes the interaction of certain populations of field mice and owls [see Eq. (8) of
   Fi e l d M i c e Section 1.1]. Find solutions of this equation.
    and Owls           To solve Eq. (4), we need to find functions p(t) that, when substituted into the equation,
  (continued)       reduce it to an obvious identity. Here is one way to proceed. First, rewrite Eq. (4) in the form
                                                              dp     p − 900
                                                                  =          ,                                    (5)
                                                              dt        2
                    or, if p = 900,
                                                                dp/dt      1
                                                                        = .                                       (6)
                                                               p − 900     2
By the chain rule the left side of Eq. (6) is the derivative of ln |p − 900| with respect to t, so we
have
                                        d                    1
                                            ln |p − 900| = .                                       (7)
                                        dt                   2
Then, by integrating both sides of Eq. (7), we obtain
                                                        t
                                      ln |p − 900| =      + C,                                     (8)
                                                       2
where C is an arbitrary constant of integration. Therefore, by taking the exponential of both
sides of Eq. (8), we find that
                                   |p − 900| = e(t/2)+C = eC et/2 ,                                (9)
or
                                        p − 900 = ±eC et/2 ,                                     (10)
and finally
                                           p = 900 + cet/2 ,                                     (11)
where c = ±e is also an arbitrary (nonzero) constant. Note that the constant function p = 900
                C
is also a solution of Eq. (5) and that it is contained in the expression (11) if we allow c to take
the value zero. Graphs of Eq. (11) for several values of c are shown in Figure 1.2.1.
                 p
            1200
            1100
            1000
             900
             800
             700
             600
                               1              2            3            4            5   t
               FIGURE 1.2.1 Graphs of p = 900 + ce for several values of c.
                                                             t/2
                           These are solutions of dp/dt = 0.5p − 450.
   Note that they have the character inferred from the direction field in Figure 1.1.4. For
instance, solutions lying on either side of the equilibrium solution p = 900 tend to diverge
from that solution.
   In Example 1 we found infinitely many solutions of the differential equation (4),
corresponding to the infinitely many values that the arbitrary constant c in Eq. (11)
might have.This is typical of what happens when you solve a differential equation.The
solution process involves an integration, which brings with it an arbitrary constant,
whose possible values generate an infinite family of solutions.
    Frequently, we want to focus our attention on a single member of the infinite family
of solutions by specifying the value of the arbitrary constant. Most often, we do this
indirectly by specifying instead a point that must lie on the graph of the solution. For
example, to determine the constant c in Eq. (11), we could require that the population
have a given value at a certain time, such as the value 850 at time t = 0. In other words,
the graph of the solution must pass through the point (0, 850). Symbolically, we can
express this condition as
                                                   p(0) = 850.                                              (12)
Then, substituting t = 0 and p = 850 into Eq. (11), we obtain
                                                 850 = 900 + c.
Hence c = −50, and by inserting this value into Eq. (11), we obtain the desired
solution, namely,
                                               p = 900 − 50et/2 .                                           (13)
    The additional condition (12) that we used to determine c is an example of an
initial condition. The differential equation (4) together with the initial condition (12)
form an initial value problem.
    Now consider the more general problem consisting of the differential equation (3)
                                                   dy
                                                       = ay − b
                                                   dt
and the initial condition
                                                    y(0) = y0 ,                                             (14)
where y0 is an arbitrary initial value. We can solve this problem by the same method
as in Example 1. If a  = 0 and y  = b/a, then we can rewrite Eq. (3) as
                                                    dy/dt
                                                              = a.                                          (15)
                                                 y − (b/a)
By integrating both sides, we find that
                                           ln |y − (b/a)| = at + C,                                         (16)
where C is arbitrary. Then, taking the exponential of both sides of Eq. (16) and solving
for y, we obtain
                                               y = (b/a) + ceat ,                                           (17)
where c = ±eC is also arbitrary. Observe that c = 0 corresponds to the equilibrium
solution y = b/a. Finally, the initial condition (14) requires that c = y0 − (b/a), so
the solution of the initial value problem (3), (14) is
                                       y = (b/a) + [y0 − (b/a)]eat .                                        (18)
    For a  = 0 the expression (17) contains all possible solutions of Eq. (3) and is called
the general solution.3 The geometrical representation of the general solution (17) is
an infinite family of curves called integral curves. Each integral curve is associated
with a particular value of c and is the graph of the solution corresponding to that
3 If a = 0, then the solution of Eq. (3) is not given by Eq. (17). We leave it to you to find the general solution
in this case.
                value of c. Satisfying an initial condition amounts to identifying the integral curve
                that passes through the given initial point.
                   To relate the solution (18) to Eq. (2), which models the field mouse population, we
                need only replace a by the growth rate r and replace b by the predation rate k. Then
                the solution (18) becomes
                                                   p = (k/r) + [p0 − (k/r)]ert ,                              (19)
                where p0 is the initial population of field mice. The solution (19) confirms the conclu-
                sions reached on the basis of the direction field and Example 1. If p0 = k/r, then from
                Eq. (19) it follows that p = k/r for all t; this is the constant, or equilibrium, solution.
                If p0  = k/r, then the behavior of the solution depends on the sign of the coefficient
                p0 − (k/r) of the exponential term in Eq. (19). If p0 > k/r, then p grows exponentially
                with time t; if p0 < k/r, then p decreases and eventually becomes zero, corresponding
                to extinction of the field mouse population. Negative values of p, while possible for
                the expression (19), make no sense in the context of this particular problem.
                   To put the falling-object equation (1) in the form (3), we must identify a with −γ/m
                and b with −g. Making these substitutions in the solution (18), we obtain
                                               v = (mg/γ) + [v0 − (mg/γ)]e−γt/m ,                             (20)
                where v0 is the initial velocity. Again, this solution confirms the conclusions reached
                in Section 1.1 on the basis of a direction field. There is an equilibrium, or constant,
                solution v = mg/γ, and all other solutions tend to approach this equilibrium solution.
                The speed of convergence to the equilibrium solution is determined by the exponent
                −γ/m. Thus, for a given mass m, the velocity approaches the equilibrium value more
                rapidly as the drag coefficient γ increases.
                Suppose that, as in Example 2 of Section 1.1, we consider a falling object of mass m = 10 kg
 EXAMPLE        and drag coefficient γ = 2 kg/s. Then the equation of motion (1) becomes
     2                                                     dv            v
                                                               = 9.8 − .                                       (21)
 A Fa l l i n g                                            dt            5
  Object        Suppose this object is dropped from a height of 300 m. Find its velocity at any time t. How
(continued)     long will it take to fall to the ground, and how fast will it be moving at the time of impact?
                   The first step is to state an appropriate initial condition for Eq. (21). The word “dropped” in
                the statement of the problem suggests that the initial velocity is zero, so we will use the initial
                condition
                                                              v(0) = 0.                                        (22)
                   The solution of Eq. (21) can be found by substituting the values of the coefficients into the
                solution (20),but we will proceed instead to solve Eq. (21) directly. First,rewrite the equation as
                                                            dv/dt       1
                                                                   =− .                                        (23)
                                                           v − 49       5
                By integrating both sides, we obtain
                                                                       t
                                                      ln |v − 49| = − + C,                                     (24)
                                                                       5
                and then the general solution of Eq. (21) is
                                                          v = 49 + ce−t/5 ,                                    (25)
where c is arbitrary. To determine c, we substitute t = 0 and v = 0 from the initial condition
(22) into Eq. (25), with the result that c = −49. Then the solution of the initial value problem
(21), (22) is
                                         v = 49(1 − e−t/5 ).                                   (26)
Equation (26) gives the velocity of the falling object at any positive time (before it hits the
ground, of course).
   Graphs of the solution (25) for several values of c are shown in Figure 1.2.2, with the solution
(26) shown by the black curve. It is evident that all solutions tend to approach the equilibrium
solution v = 49. This confirms the conclusions we reached in Section 1.1 on the basis of the
direction fields in Figures 1.1.2 and 1.1.3.
              v
           100
             80
             60
             40
                                                                           (10.51, 43.01)
             20                           v = 49 (1 – e–t/5)
                           2          4           6           8        10           12   t
            FIGURE 1.2.2 Graphs of the solution (25), v = 49 + ce−t/5 , for several
            values of c. The black curve corresponds to the initial condition v(0) = 0.
   To find the velocity of the object when it hits the ground, we need to know the time at which
impact occurs. In other words, we need to determine how long it takes the object to fall 300 m.
To do this, we note that the distance x the object has fallen is related to its velocity v by the
equation v = dx/dt, or
                                        dx
                                            = 49(1 − e−t/5 ).                                  (27)
                                        dt
Consequently, by integrating both sides of Eq. (27), we have
                                      x = 49t + 245e−t/5 + c,                                  (28)
where c is an arbitrary constant of integration. The object starts to fall when t = 0, so we know
that x = 0 when t = 0. From Eq. (28) it follows that c = −245, so the distance the object has
fallen at time t is given by
                                     x = 49t + 245e−t/5 − 245.                                 (29)
Let T be the time at which the object hits the ground; then x = 300 when t = T. By substituting
these values in Eq. (29), we obtain the equation
                                    49T + 245e−T/5 − 545 = 0.                                  (30)
         The value of T satisfying Eq. (30) can be approximated by a numerical process4 using a scientific
         calculator or computer, with the result that T ∼
                                                        = 10.51 s. At this time, the corresponding velocity
         vT is found from Eq. (26) to be vT ∼    = 43.01 m/s. The point (10.51, 43.01) is also shown in
         Figure 1.2.2.
         Further Remarks on Mathematical Modeling. Up to this point we have related our discus-
         sion of differential equations to mathematical models of a falling object and of a
         hypothetical relation between field mice and owls. The derivation of these models
         may have been plausible, and possibly even convincing, but you should remember
         that the ultimate test of any mathematical model is whether its predictions agree
         with observations or experimental results. We have no actual observations or exper-
         imental results to use for comparison purposes here, but there are several sources of
         possible discrepancies.
            In the case of the falling object, the underlying physical principle (Newton’s law
         of motion) is well established and widely applicable. However, the assumption that
         the drag force is proportional to the velocity is less certain. Even if this assumption is
         correct, the determination of the drag coefficient γ by direct measurement presents
         difficulties. Indeed, sometimes one finds the drag coefficient indirectly—for example,
         by measuring the time of fall from a given height and then calculating the value of γ
         that predicts this observed time.
            The model of the field mouse population is subject to various uncertainties.
         The determination of the growth rate r and the predation rate k depends on
         observations of actual populations, which may be subject to considerable variation.
         The assumption that r and k are constants may also be questionable. For example,
         a constant predation rate becomes harder to sustain as the field mouse population
         becomes smaller. Further, the model predicts that a population above the equilib-
         rium value will grow exponentially larger and larger. This seems at variance with the
         behavior of actual populations; see the further discussion of population dynamics in
         Section 2.5.
            If the differences between actual observations and a mathematical model’s pre-
         dictions are too great, then you need to consider refining the model, making more
         careful observations, or perhaps both. There is almost always a tradeoff between
         accuracy and simplicity. Both are desirable, but a gain in one usually involves a loss
         in the other. However, even if a mathematical model is incomplete or somewhat inac-
         curate, it may nevertheless be useful in explaining qualitative features of the problem
         under investigation. It may also give satisfactory results under some circumstances
         but not others. Thus you should always use good judgment and common sense in
         constructing mathematical models and in using their predictions.
PROBLEMS  1. Solve each of the following initial value problems and plot the solutions for several values
              of y0 . Then describe in a few words how the solutions resemble, and differ from, each
              other.
              (a) dy/dt = −y + 5,        y(0) = y0
         4A computer algebra system provides this capability; many calculators also have built-in routines for
         solving such equations.
   (b) dy/dt = −2y + 5,          y(0) = y0
   (c) dy/dt = −2y + 10,          y(0) = y0
2. Follow the instructions for Problem 1 for the following initial value problems:
   (a) dy/dt = y − 5,         y(0) = y0
   (b) dy/dt = 2y − 5,         y(0) = y0
   (c) dy/dt = 2y − 10,         y(0) = y0
3. Consider the differential equation
                                          dy/dt = −ay + b,
   where both a and b are positive numbers.
   (a) Find the general solution of the differential equation.
   (b) Sketch the solution for several different initial conditions.
   (c) Describe how the solutions change under each of the following conditions:
           i. a increases.
          ii. b increases.
         iii. Both a and b increase, but the ratio b/a remains the same.
4. Consider the differential equation dy/dt = ay − b.
   (a) Find the equilibrium solution ye .
   (b) Let Y(t) = y − ye ; thus Y(t) is the deviation from the equilibrium solution. Find the
   differential equation satisfied by Y(t).
5. Undetermined Coefficients.        Here is an alternative way to solve the equation
                                            dy/dt = ay − b.                                     (i)
   (a) Solve the simpler equation
                                              dy/dt = ay.                                      (ii)
   Call the solution y1 (t).
   (b) Observe that the only difference between Eqs. (i) and (ii) is the constant −b in Eq. (i).
   Therefore, it may seem reasonable to assume that the solutions of these two equations
   also differ only by a constant. Test this assumption by trying to find a constant k such that
   y = y1 (t) + k is a solution of Eq. (i).
   (c) Compare your solution from part (b) with the solution given in the text in Eq. (17).
   Note: This method can also be used in some cases in which the constant b is replaced
   by a function g(t). It depends on whether you can guess the general form that the solution
   is likely to take. This method is described in detail in Section 3.5 in connection with second
   order equations.
6. Use the method of Problem 5 to solve the equation
                                          dy/dt = −ay + b.
7. The field mouse population in Example 1 satisfies the differential equation
                                         dp/dt = 0.5p − 450.
   (a) Find the time at which the population becomes extinct if p(0) = 850.
   (b) Find the time of extinction if p(0) = p0 , where 0 < p0 < 900.
   (c) Find the initial population p0 if the population is to become extinct in 1 year.
 8. Consider a population p of field mice that grows at a rate proportional to the current
    population, so that dp/dt = rp.
    (a) Find the rate constant r if the population doubles in 30 days.
    (b) Find r if the population doubles in N days.
 9. The falling object in Example 2 satisfies the initial value problem
                                 dv/dt = 9.8 − (v/5),       v(0) = 0.
    (a) Find the time that must elapse for the object to reach 98% of its limiting velocity.
    (b) How far does the object fall in the time found in part (a)?
10. Modify Example 2 so that the falling object experiences no air resistance.
    (a) Write down the modified initial value problem.
    (b) Determine how long it takes the object to reach the ground.
    (c) Determine its velocity at the time of impact.
11. Consider the falling object of mass 10 kg in Example 2, but assume now that the drag force
    is proportional to the square of the velocity.
    (a) If the limiting velocity is 49 m/s (the same as in Example 2), show that the equation
    of motion can be written as
                                      dv/dt = [(49)2 − v2 ]/245.
    Also see Problem 25 of Section 1.1.
    (b) If v(0) = 0, find an expression for v(t) at any time.
    (c) Plot your solution from part (b) and the solution (26) from Example 2 on the same
    axes.
    (d) Based on your plots in part (c), compare the effect of a quadratic drag force with that
    of a linear drag force.
    (e) Find the distance x(t) that the object falls in time t.
    (f) Find the time T it takes the object to fall 300 m.
12. A radioactive material,such as the isotope thorium-234,disintegrates at a rate proportional
    to the amount currently present. If Q(t) is the amount present at time t, then dQ/dt = −rQ,
    where r > 0 is the decay rate.
    (a) If 100 mg of thorium-234 decays to 82.04 mg in 1 week, determine the decay rate r.
    (b) Find an expression for the amount of thorium-234 present at any time t.
    (c) Find the time required for the thorium-234 to decay to one-half its original amount.
13. The half-life of a radioactive material is the time required for an amount of this material
    to decay to one-half its original value. Show that for any radioactive material that decays
    according to the equation Q = −rQ, the half-life τ and the decay rate r satisfy the equation
    rτ = ln 2.
14. Radium-226 has a half-life of 1620 years. Find the time period during which a given amount
    of this material is reduced by one-quarter.
15. According to Newton’s law of cooling (see Problem 23 of Section 1.1), the temperature
    u(t) of an object satisfies the differential equation
                                          du
                                              = −k(u − T),
                                          dt
    where T is the constant ambient temperature and k is a positive constant. Suppose that
    the initial temperature of the object is u(0) = u0 .
    (a) Find the temperature of the object at any time.
    (b) Let τ be the time at which the initial temperature difference u0 − T has been reduced
    by half. Find the relation between k and τ.
16. Suppose that a building loses heat in accordance with Newton’s law of cooling (see Problem
    15) and that the rate constant k has the value 0.15 h−1 .Assume that the interior temperature
    is 70◦ F when the heating system fails. If the external temperature is 10◦ F, how long will it
    take for the interior temperature to fall to 32◦ F?
17. Consider an electric circuit containing a capacitor, resistor, and battery; see Figure 1.2.3.
    The charge Q(t) on the capacitor satisfies the equation5
                                                dQ Q
                                              R     +      = V,
                                                dt      C
    where R is the resistance, C is the capacitance, and V is the constant voltage supplied by
    the battery.
    (a) If Q(0) = 0, find Q(t) at any time t, and sketch the graph of Q versus t.
    (b) Find the limiting value QL that Q(t) approaches after a long time.
    (c) Suppose that Q(t1 ) = QL and that at time t = t1 the battery is removed and the circuit
    is closed again. Find Q(t) for t > t1 and sketch its graph.
                                                      R
                                      V
                                                      C
                        FIGURE 1.2.3 The electric circuit of Problem 17.
18. A pond containing 1,000,000 gal of water is initially free of a certain undesirable chemical
    (see Problem 21 of Section 1.1). Water containing 0.01 g/gal of the chemical flows into the
    pond at a rate of 300 gal/h, and water also flows out of the pond at the same rate. Assume
    that the chemical is uniformly distributed throughout the pond.
    (a) Let Q(t) be the amount of the chemical in the pond at time t. Write down an initial
    value problem for Q(t).
    (b) Solve the problem in part (a) for Q(t). How much chemical is in the pond after 1 year?
    (c) At the end of 1 year the source of the chemical in the pond is removed; thereafter
    pure water flows into the pond, and the mixture flows out at the same rate as before. Write
    down the initial value problem that describes this new situation.
    (d) Solve the initial value problem in part (c). How much chemical remains in the pond
    after 1 additional year (2 years from the beginning of the problem)?
    (e) How long does it take for Q(t) to be reduced to 10 g?
    (f) Plot Q(t) versus t for 3 years.
19. Your swimming pool containing 60,000 gal of water has been contaminated by 5 kg of
    a nontoxic dye that leaves a swimmer’s skin an unattractive green. The pool’s filtering
    system can take water from the pool, remove the dye, and return the water to the pool at
    a flow rate of 200 gal/min.
5This equation results from Kirchhoff’s laws, which are discussed in Section 3.7.
                    (a) Write down the initial value problem for the filtering process; let q(t) be the amount
                    of dye in the pool at any time t.
                    (b) Solve the problem in part (a).
                    (c) You have invited several dozen friends to a pool party that is scheduled to begin in 4 h.
                    You have also determined that the effect of the dye is imperceptible if its concentration
                    is less than 0.02 g/gal. Is your filtering system capable of reducing the dye concentration
                    to this level within 4 h?
                    (d) Find the time T at which the concentration of dye first reaches the value 0.02 g/gal.
                    (e) Find the flow rate that is sufficient to achieve the concentration 0.02 g/gal within 4 h.
1.3 Classification of Differential Equations
                The main purpose of this book is to discuss some of the properties of solutions of
                differential equations, and to present some of the methods that have proved effective
                in finding solutions or, in some cases, approximating them. To provide a framework
                for our presentation, we describe here several useful ways of classifying differential
                equations.
                Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations. One important classification is based on
                whether the unknown function depends on a single independent variable or on sev-
                eral independent variables. In the first case, only ordinary derivatives appear in the
                differential equation, and it is said to be an ordinary differential equation. In the sec-
                ond case, the derivatives are partial derivatives, and the equation is called a partial
                differential equation.
                  All the differential equations discussed in the preceding two sections are ordinary
                differential equations. Another example of an ordinary differential equation is
                                              d2 Q(t)         dQ(t)      1
                                           L        2
                                                         +R           + Q(t) = E(t),                         (1)
                                                 dt              dt      C
                for the charge Q(t) on a capacitor in a circuit with capacitance C, resistance R, and
                inductance L; this equation is derived in Section 3.7. Typical examples of partial
                differential equations are the heat conduction equation
                                                          ∂2 u(x, t)    ∂u(x, t)
                                                       α2            =                                       (2)
                                                             ∂x2           ∂t
                and the wave equation
                                                         ∂2 u(x, t)    ∂2 u(x, t)
                                                      a2             =            .                          (3)
                                                            ∂x 2          ∂t 2
                Here, α2 and a2 are certain physical constants. Note that in both Eqs. (2) and (3) the
                dependent variable u depends on the two independent variables x and t. The heat
                conduction equation describes the conduction of heat in a solid body, and the wave
                equation arises in a variety of problems involving wave motion in solids or fluids.
                Systems of Differential Equations. Another classification of differential equations de-
                pends on the number of unknown functions that are involved. If there is a single
function to be determined, then one equation is sufficient. However, if there are two
or more unknown functions, then a system of equations is required. For example, the
Lotka–Volterra, or predator–prey, equations are important in ecological modeling.
They have the form
                                               dx/dt = ax − αxy
                                                                                                          (4)
                                               dy/dt = −cy + γxy,
where x(t) and y(t) are the respective populations of the prey and predator species.
The constants a, α, c, and γ are based on empirical observations and depend on the
particular species being studied. Systems of equations are discussed in Chapters 7
and 9; in particular, the Lotka–Volterra equations are examined in Section 9.5. In
some areas of application it is not unusual to encounter very large systems containing
hundreds, or even many thousands, of equations.
Order. The order of a differential equation is the order of the highest derivative that
appears in the equation. The equations in the preceding sections are all first order
equations, whereas Eq. (1) is a second order equation. Equations (2) and (3) are
second order partial differential equations. More generally, the equation
                                       F[t, u(t), u (t), . . . , u(n) (t)] = 0                           (5)
is an ordinary differential equation of the nth order. Equation (5) expresses a relation
between the independent variable t and the values of the function u and its first n
derivatives u , u , . . . , u(n) . It is convenient and customary in differential equations to
write y for u(t), with y , y , . . . , y(n) standing for u (t), u (t), . . . , u(n) (t). Thus Eq. (5) is
written as
                                             F(t, y, y , . . . , y(n) ) = 0.                             (6)
For example,
                                              y + 2et y + yy = t 4                                  (7)
is a third order differential equation for y = u(t). Occasionally, other letters will be
used instead of t and y for the independent and dependent variables; the meaning
should be clear from the context.
   We assume that it is always possible to solve a given ordinary differential equation
for the highest derivative, obtaining
                                       y(n) = f (t, y, y , y , . . . , y(n−1) ).                       (8)
This is mainly to avoid the ambiguity that may arise because a single equation of
the form (6) may correspond to several equations of the form (8). For example, the
equation
                                               (y )2 + ty + 4y = 0                                      (9)
leads to the two equations
                                                                                
                               −t +       t 2 − 16y                      −t −     t 2 − 16y
                      y =                                   or      y =                       .          (10)
                                           2                                        2
Linear and Nonlinear Equations. A crucial classification of differential equations is
whether they are linear or nonlinear. The ordinary differential equation
                                              F(t, y, y , . . . , y(n) ) = 0
is said to be linear if F is a linear function of the variables y, y , . . . , y(n) ; a similar
definition applies to partial differential equations. Thus the general linear ordinary
differential equation of order n is
                       a0 (t)y(n) + a1 (t)y(n−1) + · · · + an (t)y = g(t).                  (11)
Most of the equations you have seen thus far in this book are linear; examples are
the equations in Sections 1.1 and 1.2 describing the falling object and the field mouse
population. Similarly, in this section, Eq. (1) is a linear ordinary differential equation
and Eqs. (2) and (3) are linear partial differential equations. An equation that is not
of the form (11) is a nonlinear equation. Equation (7) is nonlinear because of the
term yy . Similarly, each equation in the system (4) is nonlinear because of the terms
that involve the product xy.
   A simple physical problem that leads to a nonlinear differential equation is the
oscillating pendulum. The angle θ that an oscillating pendulum of length L makes
with the vertical direction (see Figure 1.3.1) satisfies the equation
                                     d2 θ     g
                                            +    sin θ = 0,                                 (12)
                                     dt 2     L
whose derivation is outlined in Problems 29 through 31. The presence of the term
involving sin θ makes Eq. (12) nonlinear.
                                           θ
                                                  L
                                                         m
                                                         mg
                          FIGURE 1.3.1 An oscillating pendulum.
   The mathematical theory and methods for solving linear equations are highly
developed. In contrast, for nonlinear equations the theory is more complicated, and
methods of solution are less satisfactory. In view of this, it is fortunate that many
significant problems lead to linear ordinary differential equations or can be approx-
imated by linear equations. For example, for the pendulum, if the angle θ is small,
then sin θ ∼ = θ and Eq. (12) can be approximated by the linear equation
                                        d2 θ    g
                                              + θ = 0.                                      (13)
                                         dt 2   L
This process of approximating a nonlinear equation by a linear one is called lineariza-
tion; it is an extremely valuable way to deal with nonlinear equations. Nevertheless,
there are many physical phenomena that simply cannot be represented adequately
by linear equations. To study these phenomena, it is essential to deal with nonlinear
equations.
   In an elementary text it is natural to emphasize the simpler and more straight-
forward parts of the subject. Therefore, the greater part of this book is devoted to
linear equations and various methods for solving them. However, Chapters 8 and 9,
as well as parts of Chapter 2, are concerned with nonlinear equations. Whenever it
is appropriate, we point out why nonlinear equations are, in general, more difficult
and why many of the techniques that are useful in solving linear equations cannot
be applied to nonlinear equations.
Solutions. A solution of the ordinary differential equation (8) on the interval
α < t < β is a function φ such that φ , φ , . . . , φ(n) exist and satisfy
                             φ(n) (t) = f [t, φ(t), φ (t), . . . , φ(n−1) (t)]             (14)
for every t in α < t < β. Unless stated otherwise, we assume that the function f
of Eq. (8) is a real-valued function, and we are interested in obtaining real-valued
solutions y = φ(t).
   Recall that in Section 1.2 we found solutions of certain equations by a process of
direct integration. For instance, we found that the equation
                                         dp
                                              = 0.5p − 450                                  (15)
                                          dt
has the solution
                                          p = 900 + cet/2 ,                                 (16)
where c is an arbitrary constant. It is often not so easy to find solutions of differential
equations. However, if you find a function that you think may be a solution of a given
equation, it is usually relatively easy to determine whether the function is actually a
solution simply by substituting the function into the equation. For example, in this
way it is easy to show that the function y1 (t) = cos t is a solution of
                                              y + y = 0                                   (17)
for all t. To confirm this, observe that y1 (t) = −sin t and y1 (t) = −cos t; then it follows
that y1 (t) + y1 (t) = 0. In the same way you can easily show that y2 (t) = sin t is also
a solution of Eq. (17). Of course, this does not constitute a satisfactory way to solve
most differential equations, because there are far too many possible functions for you
to have a good chance of finding the correct one by a random choice. Nevertheless,
you should realize that you can verify whether any proposed solution is correct by
substituting it into the differential equation. This can be a very useful check; it is one
that you should make a habit of considering.
Some Important Questions. Although for the equations (15) and (17) we are able to
verify that certain simple functions are solutions, in general we do not have such
solutions readily available. Thus a fundamental question is the following: Does an
equation of the form (8) always have a solution? The answer is “No.” Merely writing
down an equation of the form (8) does not necessarily mean that there is a function
y = φ(t) that satisfies it. So, how can we tell whether some particular equation has a
solution? This is the question of existence of a solution, and it is answered by theorems
stating that under certain restrictions on the function f in Eq. (8), the equation always
has solutions. This is not a purely mathematical concern for at least two reasons.
If a problem has no solution, we would prefer to know that fact before investing
time and effort in a vain attempt to solve the problem. Further, if a sensible physical
problem is modeled mathematically as a differential equation, then the equation
should have a solution. If it does not, then presumably there is something wrong with
the formulation. In this sense an engineer or scientist has some check on the validity
of the mathematical model.
   If we assume that a given differential equation has at least one solution, then
we may need to consider how many solutions it has, and what additional conditions
must be specified to single out a particular solution. This is the question of uniqueness.
In general, solutions of differential equations contain one or more arbitrary con-
stants of integration, as does the solution (16) of Eq. (15). Equation (16) represents
an infinity of functions corresponding to the infinity of possible choices of the con-
stant c. As we saw in Section 1.2, if p is specified at some time t, this condition will
determine a value for c; even so, we have not yet ruled out the possibility that there
may be other solutions of Eq. (15) that also have the prescribed value of p at the
prescribed time t. As in the question of existence of solutions, the issue of uniqueness
has practical as well as theoretical implications. If we are fortunate enough to find a
solution of a given problem, and if we know that the problem has a unique solution,
then we can be sure that we have completely solved the problem. If there may be
other solutions, then perhaps we should continue to search for them.
   A third important question is: Given a differential equation of the form (8), can
we actually determine a solution, and if so, how? Note that if we find a solution of
the given equation, we have at the same time answered the question of the exis-
tence of a solution. However, without knowledge of existence theory we might,
for example, use a computer to find a numerical approximation to a “solution”
that does not exist. On the other hand, even though we may know that a solution
exists, it may be that the solution is not expressible in terms of the usual elemen-
tary functions—polynomial, trigonometric, exponential, logarithmic, and hyperbolic
functions. Unfortunately, this is the situation for most differential equations. Thus,
we discuss both elementary methods that can be used to obtain exact solutions of
certain relatively simple problems, and also methods of a more general nature that
can be used to find approximations to solutions of more difficult problems.
Computer Use in Differential Equations. A computer can be an extremely valuable tool
in the study of differential equations. For many years computers have been used
to execute numerical algorithms, such as those described in Chapter 8, to construct
numerical approximations to solutions of differential equations. These algorithms
have been refined to an extremely high level of generality and efficiency. A few lines
of computer code, written in a high-level programming language and executed (often
within a few seconds) on a relatively inexpensive computer, suffice to approximate to
a high degree of accuracy the solutions of a wide range of differential equations. More
sophisticated routines are also readily available. These routines combine the ability
to handle very large and complicated systems with numerous diagnostic features that
alert the user to possible problems as they are encountered.
   The usual output from a numerical algorithm is a table of numbers, listing selected
values of the independent variable and the corresponding values of the dependent
variable. With appropriate software it is easy to display the solution of a differen-
tial equation graphically, whether the solution has been obtained numerically or as
         the result of an analytical procedure of some kind. Such a graphical display is often
         much more illuminating and helpful in understanding and interpreting the solution of
         a differential equation than a table of numbers or a complicated analytical formula.
         There are on the market several well-crafted and relatively inexpensive special-
         purpose software packages for the graphical investigation of differential equations.
         The widespread availability of personal computers has brought powerful computa-
         tional and graphical capability within the reach of individual students. You should
         consider, in the light of your own circumstances, how best to take advantage of the
         available computing resources. You will surely find it enlightening to do so.
            Another aspect of computer use that is very relevant to the study of differential
         equations is the availability of extremely powerful and general software packages
         that can perform a wide variety of mathematical operations. Among these are Maple,
         Mathematica, and MATLAB, each of which can be used on various kinds of personal
         computers or workstations. All three of these packages can execute extensive numer-
         ical computations and have versatile graphical facilities. Maple and Mathematica also
         have very extensive analytical capabilities. For example, they can perform the ana-
         lytical steps involved in solving many differential equations, often in response to a
         single command. Anyone who expects to deal with differential equations in more
         than a superficial way should become familiar with at least one of these products and
         explore the ways in which it can be used.
            For you, the student, these computing resources have an effect on how you should
         study differential equations. To become confident in using differential equations, it
         is essential to understand how the solution methods work, and this understanding is
         achieved, in part, by working out a sufficient number of examples in detail. However,
         eventually you should plan to delegate as many as possible of the routine (often
         repetitive) details to a computer, while you focus on the proper formulation of the
         problem and on the interpretation of the solution. Our viewpoint is that you should
         always try to use the best methods and tools available for each task. In particular,
         you should strive to combine numerical, graphical, and analytical methods so as to
         attain maximum understanding of the behavior of the solution and of the underlying
         process that the problem models. You should also remember that some tasks can best
         be done with pencil and paper, while others require a calculator or computer. Good
         judgment is often needed in selecting an effective combination.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, determine the order of the given differential equation; also
         state whether the equation is linear or nonlinear.
                  d2 y     dy                                                d2 y     dy
           1. t 2      +t     + 2y = sin t                     2. (1 + y2 )        +t     + y = et
                  dt 2     dt                                                dt 2     dt
              d4 y d3 y d2 y dy                                   dy
           3.        + 3 + 2 +             +y=1                4.       + ty2 = 0
               dt 4     dt     dt       dt                         dt
              d2 y                                                d3 y      dy
           5.        + sin(t + y) = sin t                      6.        +t       + (cos2 t)y = t 3
               dt 2                                                dt 3      dt
         In each of Problems 7 through 14, verify that each given function is a solution of the differ-
         ential equation.
           7. y − y = 0;       y1 (t) = et , y2 (t) = cosh t
  8. y + 2y − 3y = 0;         y1 (t) = e−3t , y2 (t) = et
         
  9. ty − y = t ;   2
                         y = 3t + t 2
            
10. y + 4y + 3y = t;                y1 (t) = t/3, y2 (t) = e−t + t/3
         2         
11. 2t y + 3ty − y = 0, t > 0;                 y1 (t) = t 1/2 , y2 (t) = t −1
12. t 2 y + 5ty + 4y = 0, t > 0;            y1 (t) = t −2 , y2 (t) = t −2 ln t
       
13. y + y = sec t, 0 < t < π/2;                y = (cos t) ln cos t + t sin t
                                     t
                                t2       −s2         2
14. y − 2ty = 1;          y=e            e ds + et
                                      0
In each of Problems 15 through 18, determine the values of r for which the given differential
equation has solutions of the form y = ert .
15. y + 2y = 0                                           16. y − y = 0
            
17. y + y − 6y = 0                                        18. y − 3y + 2y = 0
In each of Problems 19 and 20, determine the values of r for which the given differential
equation has solutions of the form y = t r for t > 0.
19. t 2 y + 4ty + 2y = 0                               20. t 2 y − 4ty + 4y = 0
In each of Problems 21 through 24, determine the order of the given partial differential equa-
tion; also state whether the equation is linear or nonlinear. Partial derivatives are denoted by
subscripts.
21. uxx + uyy + uzz = 0                                   22. uxx + uyy + uux + uuy + u = 0
23. uxxxx + 2uxxyy + uyyyy = 0                            24. ut + uux = 1 + uxx
In each of Problems 25 through 28, verify that each given function is a solution of the given
partial differential equation.
25. uxx + uyy = 0;          u1 (x, y) = cos x cosh y, u2 (x, y) = ln(x2 + y2 )
                                          2                           2 2
26. α2 uxx = ut ;       u1 (x, t) = e−α t sin x, u2 (x, t) = e−α λ t sin λx, λ a real constant
27. a uxx = utt ;
       2
                        u1 (x, t) = sin λx sin λat, u2 (x, t) = sin(x − at), λ a real constant
                                            2  2
28. α2 uxx = ut ;       u = (π/t)1/2 e−x /4α t , t > 0
29. Follow the steps indicated here to derive the equation of motion of a pendulum, Eq. (12)
     in the text. Assume that the rod is rigid and weightless, that the mass is a point mass, and
     that there is no friction or drag anywhere in the system.
     (a) Assume that the mass is in an arbitrary displaced position, indicated by the angle θ.
     Draw a free-body diagram showing the forces acting on the mass.
     (b) Apply Newton’s law of motion in the direction tangential to the circular arc on which
     the mass moves. Then the tensile force in the rod does not enter the equation. Observe
     that you need to find the component of the gravitational force in the tangential direc-
     tion. Observe also that the linear acceleration, as opposed to the angular acceleration, is
     Ld2 θ/dt 2 , where L is the length of the rod.
     (c) Simplify the result from part (b) to obtain Eq. (12) in the text.
30. Another way to derive the pendulum equation (12) is based on the principle of
     conservation of energy.
     (a) Show that the kinetic energy T of the pendulum in motion is
                                                                 2
                                                        1      2 dθ
                                                 T = mL                 .
                                                        2         dt
     (b) Show that the potential energy V of the pendulum, relative to its rest position, is
                                               V = mgL(1 − cos θ).
                     (c) By the principle of conservation of energy, the total energy E = T + V is constant.
                     Calculate dE/dt, set it equal to zero, and show that the resulting equation reduces to
                     Eq. (12).
                31. A third derivation of the pendulum equation depends on the principle of angular
                     momentum: The rate of change of angular momentum about any point is equal to the
                     net external moment about the same point.
                     (a) Show that the angular momentum M, or moment of momentum, about the point of
                     support is given by M = mL2 dθ/dt.
                     (b) Set dM/dt equal to the moment of the gravitational force, and show that the resulting
                     equation reduces to Eq. (12). Note that positive moments are counterclockwise.
1.4 Historical Remarks
                Without knowing something about differential equations and methods of solving
                them, it is difficult to appreciate the history of this important branch of mathematics.
                Further, the development of differential equations is intimately interwoven with the
                general development of mathematics and cannot be separated from it. Nevertheless,
                to provide some historical perspective, we indicate here some of the major trends in
                the history of the subject and identify the most prominent early contributors. Other
                historical information is contained in footnotes scattered throughout the book and
                in the references listed at the end of the chapter.
                  The subject of differential equations originated in the study of calculus by Isaac
                Newton (1642–1727) and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) in the seventeenth
                century. Newton grew up in the English countryside, was educated at Trinity Col-
                lege, Cambridge, and became Lucasian Professor of Mathematics there in 1669. His
                epochal discoveries of calculus and of the fundamental laws of mechanics date from
                1665. They were circulated privately among his friends, but Newton was extremely
                sensitive to criticism and did not begin to publish his results until 1687 with the
                appearance of his most famous book, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathemat-
                ica. Although Newton did relatively little work in differential equations as such, his
                development of the calculus and elucidation of the basic principles of mechanics pro-
                vided a basis for their applications in the eighteenth century, most notably by Euler.
                Newton classified first order differential equations according to the three forms
                dy/dx = f (x), dy/dx = f (y), and dy/dx = f (x, y). For the latter equation he devel-
                oped a method of solution using infinite series when f (x, y) is a polynomial in x
                and y. Newton’s active research in mathematics ended in the early 1690s, except for
                the solution of occasional “challenge problems” and the revision and publication of
                results obtained much earlier. He was appointed Warden of the British Mint in 1696
                and resigned his professorship a few years later. He was knighted in 1705 and, upon
                his death, was buried in Westminster Abbey.
                   Leibniz was born in Leipzig and completed his doctorate in philosophy at the age
                of 20 at the University of Altdorf. Throughout his life he engaged in scholarly work in
                several different fields. He was mainly self-taught in mathematics, since his interest
                in this subject developed when he was in his twenties. Leibniz arrived at the funda-
                mental results of calculus independently, although a little later than Newton, but was
the first to publish them, in 1684. Leibniz was very conscious of the power of good
mathematical notation and was responsible for the notation dy/dx for the deriva-
tive and for the integral sign. He discovered the method of separation of variables
(Section 2.2) in 1691, the reduction of homogeneous equations to separable ones
(Section 2.2, Problem 30) in 1691, and the procedure for solving first order linear
equations (Section 2.1) in 1694. He spent his life as ambassador and adviser to sev-
eral German royal families, which permitted him to travel widely and to carry on an
extensive correspondence with other mathematicians, especially the Bernoulli broth-
ers. In the course of this correspondence many problems in differential equations
were solved during the latter part of the seventeenth century.
   The brothers Jakob (1654–1705) and Johann (1667–1748) Bernoulli of Basel did
much to develop methods of solving differential equations and to extend the range
of their applications. Jakob became professor of mathematics at Basel in 1687, and
Johann was appointed to the same position upon his brother’s death in 1705. Both
men were quarrelsome, jealous, and frequently embroiled in disputes, especially with
each other. Nevertheless, both also made significant contributions to several areas of
mathematics. With the aid of calculus, they solved a number of problems in mechanics
by formulating them as differential equations. For example, Jakob Bernoulli solved
the differential equation y = [a3 /(b2 y − a3 )]1/2 in 1690 and, in the same paper, first
used the term “integral” in the modern sense. In 1694 Johann Bernoulli was able
to solve the equation dy/dx = y/ax. One problem which both brothers solved, and
which led to much friction between them, was the brachistochrone problem (see
Problem 32 of Section 2.3). The brachistochrone problem was also solved by Leibniz,
Newton, and the Marquis de L’Hôpital. It is said, perhaps apocryphally, that Newton
learned of the problem late in the afternoon of a tiring day at the Mint and solved it
that evening after dinner. He published the solution anonymously, but upon seeing
it, Johann Bernoulli exclaimed, “Ah, I know the lion by his paw.”
    Daniel Bernoulli (1700–1782), son of Johann, migrated to St. Petersburg as a young
man to join the newly established St. Petersburg Academy but returned to Basel
in 1733 as professor of botany and, later, of physics. His interests were primarily in
partial differential equations and their applications. For instance, it is his name that
is associated with the Bernoulli equation in fluid mechanics. He was also the first
to encounter the functions that a century later became known as Bessel functions
(Section 5.7).
   The greatest mathematician of the eighteenth century, Leonhard Euler (1707–
1783), grew up near Basel and was a student of Johann Bernoulli. He followed his
friend Daniel Bernoulli to St. Petersburg in 1727. For the remainder of his life he
was associated with the St. Petersburg Academy (1727–1741 and 1766–1783) and
the Berlin Academy (1741–1766). Euler was the most prolific mathematician of all
time; his collected works fill more than 70 large volumes. His interests ranged over
all areas of mathematics and many fields of application. Even though he was blind
during the last 17 years of his life, his work continued undiminished until the very day
of his death. Of particular interest here is his formulation of problems in mechanics
in mathematical language and his development of methods of solving these mathe-
matical problems. Lagrange said of Euler’s work in mechanics, “The first great work
in which analysis is applied to the science of movement.” Among other things, Euler
identified the condition for exactness of first order differential equations (Section
2.6) in 1734–35, developed the theory of integrating factors (Section 2.6) in the same
paper, and gave the general solution of homogeneous linear equations with constant
coefficients (Sections 3.1, 3.3, 3.4, and 4.2) in 1743. He extended the latter results to
nonhomogeneous equations in 1750–51. Beginning about 1750, Euler made frequent
use of power series (Chapter 5) in solving differential equations. He also proposed
a numerical procedure (Sections 2.7 and 8.1) in 1768–69, made important contribu-
tions in partial differential equations, and gave the first systematic treatment of the
calculus of variations.
   Joseph-Louis Lagrange (1736–1813) became professor of mathematics in his native
Turin at the age of 19. He succeeded Euler in the chair of mathematics at the Berlin
Academy in 1766 and moved on to the Paris Academy in 1787. He is most famous for
his monumental work Mécanique analytique, published in 1788, an elegant and com-
prehensive treatise of Newtonian mechanics. With respect to elementary differential
equations, Lagrange showed in 1762–65 that the general solution of an nth order
linear homogeneous differential equation is a linear combination of n independent
solutions (Sections 3.2 and 4.1). Later, in 1774–75, he gave a complete development
of the method of variation of parameters (Sections 3.6 and 4.4). Lagrange is also
known for fundamental work in partial differential equations and the calculus of
variations.
   Pierre-Simon de Laplace (1749–1827) lived in Normandy as a boy but came to
Paris in 1768 and quickly made his mark in scientific circles, winning election to the
Académie des Sciences in 1773. He was preeminent in the field of celestial mechanics;
his greatest work,Traité de mécanique céleste, was published in five volumes between
1799 and 1825. Laplace’s equation is fundamental in many branches of mathematical
physics, and Laplace studied it extensively in connection with gravitational attraction.
The Laplace transform (Chapter 6) is also named for him, although its usefulness in
solving differential equations was not recognized until much later.
   By the end of the eighteenth century many elementary methods of solving ordinary
differential equations had been discovered. In the nineteenth century interest turned
more toward the investigation of theoretical questions of existence and uniqueness
and to the development of less elementary methods such as those based on power
series expansions (see Chapter 5).These methods find their natural setting in the com-
plex plane. Consequently, they benefitted from, and to some extent stimulated, the
more or less simultaneous development of the theory of complex analytic functions.
Partial differential equations also began to be studied intensively, as their crucial role
in mathematical physics became clear. In this connection a number of functions, aris-
ing as solutions of certain ordinary differential equations, occurred repeatedly and
were studied exhaustively. Known collectively as higher transcendental functions,
many of them are associated with the names of mathematicians, including Bessel,
Legendre, Hermite, Chebyshev, and Hankel, among others.
   The numerous differential equations that resisted solution by analytical means
led to the investigation of methods of numerical approximation (see Chapter 8).
By 1900 fairly effective numerical integration methods had been devised, but their
implementation was severely restricted by the need to execute the computations by
hand or with very primitive computing equipment. In the last 60 years the develop-
ment of increasingly powerful and versatile computers has vastly enlarged the range
of problems that can be investigated effectively by numerical methods. Extremely
refined and robust numerical integrators were developed during the same period
and are readily available. Versions appropriate for personal computers have brought
           the ability to solve a great many significant problems within the reach of individual
           students.
              Another characteristic of differential equations in the twentieth century was the
           creation of geometrical or topological methods, especially for nonlinear equations.
           The goal is to understand at least the qualitative behavior of solutions from a
           geometrical, as well as from an analytical, point of view. If more detailed informa-
           tion is needed, it can usually be obtained by using numerical approximations. An
           introduction to geometrical methods appears in Chapter 9.
              Within the past few years these two trends have come together. Computers, and
           especially computer graphics, have given a new impetus to the study of systems of
           nonlinear differential equations. Unexpected phenomena (Section 9.8), such as
           strange attractors, chaos, and fractals, have been discovered, are being intensively
           studied, and are leading to important new insights in a variety of applications.
           Although it is an old subject about which much is known, the study of differen-
           tial equations in the twenty-first century remains a fertile source of fascinating and
           important unsolved problems.
REFERENCES Computer software for differential equations changes too fast for particulars to be given in a book such
           as this. A Google search for Maple, Mathematica, Sage, or MATLAB is a good way to begin if you need
           information about one of these computer algebra and numerical systems.
              There are many instructional books on computer algebra systems, such as the following:
           Cheung, C.-K., Keough, G. E., Gross, R. H., and Landraitis, C., Getting Started with Mathematica (3rd ed.)
              (New York: Wiley, 2009).
           Meade, D. B., May, M., Cheung, C.-K., and Keough, G. E., Getting Started with Maple (3rd ed.) (New York:
              Wiley, 2009).
              For further reading in the history of mathematics, see books such as those listed below:
           Boyer, C. B., and Merzbach, U. C., A History of Mathematics (2nd ed.) (New York: Wiley, 1989).
           Kline, M., Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times (3 vols.) (New York: Oxford University
              Press, 1990).
              A useful historical appendix on the early development of differential equations appears in
           Ince, E. L., Ordinary Differential Equations (London: Longmans, Green, 1927; New York: Dover, 1956).
              Encyclopedic sources of information about the lives and achievements of mathematicians of the
           past are
           Gillespie, C. C., ed., Dictionary of Scientific Biography (15 vols.) (New York: Scribner’s, 1971).
           Koertge, N., ed., New Dictionary of Scientific Biography (8 vols.) (New York: Scribner’s, 2007).
           Koertge, N., ed., Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography (New York: Scribner’s, 2007 [e-book]).
              Much historical information can be found on the Internet. One excellent site is the MacTutor History
           of Mathematics archive
                                            http://www-history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/history/
           created by John J. O’Connor and Edmund F. Robertson, Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
           University of St. Andrews, Scotland.
 CHAPTER
      2
               First Order
               Differential Equations
              This chapter deals with differential equations of first order
                                                     dy
                                                         = f (t, y),                                (1)
                                                      dt
               where f is a given function of two variables. Any differentiable function y = φ(t) that
               satisfies this equation for all t in some interval is called a solution, and our object is
               to determine whether such functions exist and, if so, to develop methods for finding
               them. Unfortunately, for an arbitrary function f , there is no general method for solv-
               ing the equation in terms of elementary functions. Instead, we will describe several
               methods, each of which is applicable to a certain subclass of first order equations.
              The most important of these are linear equations (Section 2.1), separable equa-
               tions (Section 2.2), and exact equations (Section 2.6). Other sections of this chapter
               describe some of the important applications of first order differential equations,intro-
               duce the idea of approximating a solution by numerical computation, and discuss
               some theoretical questions related to the existence and uniqueness of solutions.
              The final section includes an example of chaotic solutions in the context of first order
               difference equations, which have some important points of similarity with differential
               equations and are simpler to investigate.
2.1 Linear Equations; Method of Integrating Factors
               If the function f in Eq. (1) depends linearly on the dependent variable y, then
               Eq. (1) is called a first order linear equation. In Sections 1.1 and 1.2 we discussed a
               restricted type of first order linear equation in which the coefficients are constants.
                                                                                                    31
        A typical example is
                                                    dy
                                                         = −ay + b,                                   (2)
                                                    dt
        where a and b are given constants. Recall that an equation of this form describes the
        motion of an object falling in the atmosphere.
            Now we want to consider the most general first order linear equation, which is
        obtained by replacing the coefficients a and b in Eq. (2) by arbitrary functions of t.
        We will usually write the general first order linear equation in the standard form
                                                 dy
                                                      + p(t)y = g(t),                                 (3)
                                                 dt
        where p and g are given functions of the independent variable t. Sometimes it is more
        convenient to write the equation in the form
                                                    dy
                                            P(t)        + Q(t)y = G(t),                               (4)
                                                    dt
        where P, Q, and G are given. Of course, as long as P(t)  = 0, you can convert Eq. (4)
        to Eq. (3) by dividing Eq. (4) by P(t).
            In some cases it is possible to solve a first order linear equation immediately by
        integrating the equation, as in the next example.
        Solve the differential equation
EXAMPLE                                                   dy
                                              (4 + t 2 )      + 2ty = 4t.                              (5)
   1                                                      dt
            The left side of Eq. (5) is a linear combination of dy/dt and y, a combination that also
        appears in the rule from calculus for differentiating a product. In fact,
                                                   dy              d
                                        (4 + t 2 )     + 2ty = [(4 + t 2 )y];
                                                   dt              dt
        it follows that Eq. (5) can be rewritten as
                                                   d
                                                      [(4 + t 2 )y] = 4t.                              (6)
                                                   dt
        Thus, even though y is unknown, we can integrate both sides of Eq. (6) with respect to t, thereby
        obtaining
                                                 (4 + t 2 )y = 2t 2 + c,                               (7)
        where c is an arbitrary constant of integration. By solving for y we find that
                                                         2t 2         c
                                                y=              +         .                            (8)
                                                       4 + t2      4 + t2
        This is the general solution of Eq. (5).
            Unfortunately, most first order linear equations cannot be solved as illustrated in
        Example 1 because their left sides are not the derivative of the product of y and
        some other function. However, Leibniz discovered that if the differential equation is
        multiplied by a certain function μ(t), then the equation is converted into one that is
        immediately integrable by using the product rule for derivatives, just as in Example 1.
        The function μ(t) is called an integrating factor and our main task is to determine
        how to find it for a given equation. We will show how this method works first for an
        example and then for the general first order linear equation in the standard form (3).
        Find the general solution of the differential equation
EXAMPLE
                                                   dy 1
   2                                                dt
                                                        + 2 y = 21 et/3 .                              (9)
        Draw some representative integral curves; that is, plot solutions corresponding to several
        values of the arbitrary constant c. Also find the particular solution whose graph contains the
        point (0, 1).
           The first step is to multiply Eq. (9) by a function μ(t), as yet undetermined; thus
                                                dy 1
                                          μ(t)       + 2 μ(t)y = 21 μ(t)et/3 .                        (10)
                                                 dt
        The question now is whether we can choose μ(t) so that the left side of Eq. (10) is the derivative
        of the product μ(t)y. For any differentiable function μ(t) we have
                                          d                     dy dμ(t)
                                             [μ(t)y] = μ(t)         +        y,                       (11)
                                          dt                    dt        dt
        Thus the left side of Eq. (10) and the right side of Eq. (11) are identical, provided that we
        choose μ(t) to satisfy
                                                    dμ(t)
                                                             = 21 μ(t).                               (12)
                                                       dt
           Our search for an integrating factor will be successful if we can find a solution of Eq. (12).
        Perhaps you can readily identify a function that satisfies Eq. (12): what well-known function
        from calculus has a derivative that is equal to one-half times the original function? More
        systematically, rewrite Eq. (12) as
                                                     dμ(t)/dt
                                                                 = 21 ,
                                                         μ(t)
        which is equivalent to
                                                    d
                                                        ln |μ(t)| = 21 .                              (13)
                                                    dt
        Then it follows that
                                                  ln |μ(t)| = 21 t + C,
        or
                                                      μ(t) = cet/2 .                                  (14)
        The function μ(t) given by Eq. (14) is an integrating factor for Eq. (9). Since we do not need
        the most general integrating factor, we will choose c to be 1 in Eq. (14) and use μ(t) = et/2 .
           Now we return to Eq. (9), multiply it by the integrating factor et/2 , and obtain
                                                   dy 1 t/2
                                              et/2     + 2 e y = 21 e5t/6 .                           (15)
                                                   dt
        By the choice we have made of the integrating factor, the left side of Eq. (15) is the derivative
        of et/2 y, so that Eq. (15) becomes
                                                   d t/2
                                                      (e y) = 21 e5t/6 .                              (16)
                                                   dt
   By integrating both sides of Eq. (16), we obtain
                                         et/2 y = 35 e5t/6 + c,                               (17)
where c is an arbitrary constant. Finally, on solving Eq. (17) for y, we have the general solution
of Eq. (9), namely,
                                         y = 35 et/3 + ce−t/2 .                               (18)
   To find the solution passing through the point (0, 1), we set t = 0 and y = 1 in Eq. (18),
obtaining 1 = (3/5) + c. Thus c = 2/5, and the desired solution is
                                        y = 35 et/3 + 25 e−t/2 .                              (19)
   Figure 2.1.1 includes the graphs of Eq. (18) for several values of c with a direction field in
the background. The solution satisfying y(0) = 1 is shown by the black curve.
              y
              4
              3
              2
              1
                           1          2              3           4       5          6 t
             –1
             –2
            FIGURE 2.1.1 Direction field and integral curves of y + 21 y = 21 et/3 ;
                         the black curve passes through the point (0, 1).
   Let us now extend the method of integrating factors to equations of the form
                                         dy
                                               + ay = g(t),                                   (20)
                                          dt
where a is a given constant and g(t) is a given function. Proceeding as in Example 2,
we find that the integrating factor μ(t) must satisfy
                                              dμ
                                                   = aμ,                                      (21)
                                               dt
rather than Eq. (12). Thus the integrating factor is μ(t) = eat . Multiplying Eq. (20)
by μ(t), we obtain
                                        dy
                                    eat     + aeat y = eat g(t),
                                        dt
or
                                        d at
                                           (e y) = eat g(t).                                  (22)
                                        dt
        By integrating both sides of Eq. (22), we find that
                                                       
                                             e y=
                                              at
                                                          eat g(t) dt + c,                             (23)
        where c is an arbitrary constant. For many simple functions g(t), we can evaluate the
        integral in Eq. (23) and express the solution y in terms of elementary functions, as
        in Example 2. However, for more complicated functions g(t), it is necessary to leave
        the solution in integral form. In this case
                                                     t
                                        y = e−at         eas g(s) ds + ce−at .                         (24)
                                                      t0
        Note that in Eq. (24) we have used s to denote the integration variable to distinguish
        it from the independent variable t, and we have chosen some convenient value t0 as
        the lower limit of integration.
        Find the general solution of the differential equation
EXAMPLE
   3                                               dy
                                                        − 2y = 4 − t                                     (25)
                                                   dt
        and plot the graphs of several solutions. Discuss the behavior of solutions as t → ∞.
           Equation (25) is of the form (20) with a = −2; therefore, the integrating factor is
        μ(t) = e−2t . Multiplying the differential equation (25) by μ(t), we obtain
                                              dy
                                         e−2t      − 2e−2t y = 4e−2t − te−2t ,
                                              dt
        or
                                              d −2t
                                                 (e y) = 4e−2t − te−2t .                                 (26)
                                             dt
        Then, by integrating both sides of this equation, we have
                                      e−2t y = −2e−2t + 21 te−2t + 14 e−2t + c,
        where we have used integration by parts on the last term in Eq. (26). Thus the general solution
        of Eq. (25) is
                                                 y = − 47 + 21 t + ce2t .                                (27)
           A direction field and graphs of the solution (27) for several values of c are shown in Figure
        2.1.2. The behavior of the solution for large values of t is determined by the term ce2t . If c  = 0,
        then the solution grows exponentially large in magnitude, with the same sign as c itself. Thus
        the solutions diverge as t becomes large. The boundary between solutions that ultimately grow
        positively and those that ultimately grow negatively occurs when c = 0. If we substitute c = 0
        into Eq. (27) and then set t = 0, we find that y = −7/4 is the separation point on the y-axis.
        Note that for this initial value, the solution is y = − 74 + 21 t; it grows positively, but linearly
        rather than exponentially.
            y               0.5               1              1.5            2
                                                                                t
           –1
           –2
           –3
           –4
          FIGURE 2.1.2     Direction field and integral curves of y − 2y = 4 − t.
   Now we return to the general first order linear equation (3)
                                    dy
                                         + p(t)y = g(t),
                                     dt
where p and g are given functions. To determine an appropriate integrating factor,
we multiply Eq. (3) by an as yet undetermined function μ(t), obtaining
                                 dy
                            μ(t)      + p(t)μ(t)y = μ(t)g(t).                     (28)
                                 dt
Following the same line of development as in Example 2, we see that the left side
of Eq. (28) is the derivative of the product μ(t)y, provided that μ(t) satisfies the
equation
                                     dμ(t)
                                            = p(t)μ(t).                           (29)
                                       dt
If we assume temporarily that μ(t) is positive, then we have
                                      dμ(t)/dt
                                                 = p(t),
                                        μ(t)
and consequently
                                            
                                ln μ(t) =       p(t) dt + k.
By choosing the arbitrary constant k to be zero, we obtain the simplest possible
function for μ, namely,
                                                
                                  μ(t) = exp p(t) dt.                             (30)
Note that μ(t) is positive for all t, as we assumed. Returning to Eq. (28), we have
                                   d
                                      [μ(t)y] = μ(t)g(t).                         (31)
                                  dt
        Hence                                             
                                            μ(t)y =            μ(t)g(t) dt + c,                            (32)
        where c is an arbitrary constant. Sometimes the integral in Eq.(32) can be evaluated
        in terms of elementary functions. However, in general this is not possible, so the
        general solution of Eq. (3) is
                                                        t                         
                                                 1
                                         y=                    μ(s)g(s) ds + c ,                           (33)
                                              μ(t) t0
        where again t0 is some convenient lower limit of integration. Observe that Eq. (33)
        involves two integrations, one to obtain μ(t) from Eq. (30) and the other to determine
        y from Eq. (33).
        Solve the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                                      ty + 2y = 4t 2 ,                                    (34)
   4                                                         y(1) = 2.                                     (35)
            In order to determine p(t) and g(t) correctly, we must first rewrite Eq. (34) in the standard
        form (3). Thus we have
                                                     y + (2/t)y = 4t,                                     (36)
        so p(t) = 2/t and g(t) = 4t. To solve Eq. (36), we first compute the integrating factor μ(t):
                                                           
                                                               2
                                          μ(t) = exp             dt = e2 ln |t| = t 2 .
                                                               t
        On multiplying Eq. (36) by μ(t) = t 2 , we obtain
                                              t 2 y + 2ty = (t 2 y) = 4t 3 ,
        and therefore
                                                        t 2 y = t 4 + c,
        where c is an arbitrary constant. It follows that
                                                                     c
                                                         y = t2 + 2                                        (37)
                                                                     t
        is the general solution of Eq. (34). Integral curves of Eq. (34) for several values of c are shown
        in Figure 2.1.3. To satisfy the initial condition (35), it is necessary to choose c = 1; thus
                                                               1
                                                y = t2 + 2 ,            t>0                                (38)
                                                               t
        is the solution of the initial value problem (34), (35). This solution is shown by the black curve
        in Figure 2.1.3. Note that it becomes unbounded and is asymptotic to the positive y-axis as
        t → 0 from the right. This is the effect of the infinite discontinuity in the coefficient p(t) at
        the origin. The function y = t 2 + (1/t 2 ) for t < 0 is not part of the solution of this initial value
        problem.
            This is the first example in which the solution fails to exist for some values of t. Again, this
        is due to the infinite discontinuity in p(t) at t = 0, which restricts the solution to the interval
        0 < t < ∞.
            Looking again at Figure 2.1.3, we see that some solutions (those for which c > 0) are asymp-
        totic to the positive y-axis as t → 0 from the right, while other solutions (for which c < 0)
        are asymptotic to the negative y-axis. The solution for which c = 0, namely, y = t 2 , remains
        bounded and differentiable even at t = 0. If we generalize the initial condition (35) to
                                                        y(1) = y0 ,                                     (39)
        then c = y0 − 1 and the solution (38) becomes
                                                   y0 − 1
                                       y = t2 +            ,       t > 0 if y0  = 1.                   (40)
                                                     t2
        As in Example 3, this is another instance where there is a critical initial value, namely, y0 = 1,
        that separates solutions that behave in one way from others that behave quite differently.
                                                           y
                                                            3
                                                            2
                                                                              (1, 2)
                                                            1
                                      –1                                            1           t
                                                          –1
                  FIGURE 2.1.3 Integral curves of the differential equation ty + 2y = 4t 2 ;
                                 the black curve passes through the point (1, 2).
        Solve the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                                      2y + ty = 2,                                     (41)
   5
                                                          y(0) = 1.                                     (42)
          To convert the differential equation (41) to the standard form (3), we must divide by 2,
        obtaining
                                                    y + (t/2)y = 1.                                    (43)
        Thus p(t) = t/2, and the integrating factor is μ(t) = exp(t 2 /4). Then multiply Eq. (43) by μ(t),
        so that
                                                2         t 2            2
                                              et /4 y + et /4 y = et /4 .                              (44)
                                                          2
                                                             2
        The left side of Eq. (44) is the derivative of et /4 y, so by integrating both sides of Eq. (44), we
        obtain                                            
                                                  2              2
                                               et /4 y =       et /4 dt + c.                            (45)
         The integral on the right side of Eq. (45) cannot be evaluated in terms of the usual elementary
         functions, so we leave the integral unevaluated. However, by choosing the lower limit of
         integration as the initial point t = 0, we can replace Eq. (45) by
                                                            t
                                                  2                2
                                                et /4 y =       es /4 ds + c,                          (46)
                                                              0
         where c is an arbitrary constant. It then follows that the general solution y of Eq. (41) is
         given by                                          t
                                                     2          2             2
                                            y = e−t /4        es /4 ds + ce−t /4 .                     (47)
                                                          0
         The initial condition (42) requires that c = 1.
            The main purpose of this example is to illustrate that sometimes the solution must be left in
         terms of an integral.This is usually at most a slight inconvenience,rather than a serious obstacle.
         For a given value of t, the integral in Eq. (47) is a definite integral and can be approximated to
         any desired degree of accuracy by using readily available numerical integrators. By repeating
         this process for many values of t and plotting the results, you can obtain a graph of a solution.
         Alternatively, you can use a numerical approximation method, such as those discussed in
         Chapter 8, that proceed directly from the differential equation and need no expression for the
         solution. Software packages such as Maple and Mathematica readily execute such procedures
         and produce graphs of solutions of differential equations.
            Figure 2.1.4 displays graphs of the solution (47) for several values of c. From the figure it
         may be plausible to conjecture that all solutions approach a limit as t → ∞. The limit can be
         found analytically (see Problem 32).
                        y
                        3
                        2
                        1
                                      1           2               3           4      5        6 t
                       –1
                       –2
                       –3
                                  FIGURE 2.1.4         Integral curves of 2y + ty = 2.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 12:
         (a) Draw a direction field for the given differential equation.
         (b) Based on an inspection of the direction field, describe how solutions behave for large t.
         (c) Find the general solution of the given differential equation, and use it to determine how
         solutions behave as t → ∞.
 1. y + 3y = t + e−2t                                     2. y − 2y = t 2 e2t
 3. y + y = te−t + 1                                      4. y + (1/t)y = 3 cos 2t,         t>0
 5. y − 2y = 3et                                          6. ty + 2y = sin t,      t>0
                        2
 7. y + 2ty = 2te−t                                       8. (1 + t 2 )y + 4ty = (1 + t 2 )−2
 9. 2y + y = 3t                                        10. ty − y = t 2 e−t ,      t>0
11. y + y = 5 sin 2t                                            
                                                        12. 2y + y = 3t      2
In each of Problems 13 through 20, find the solution of the given initial value problem.
13. y − y = 2te2t ,         y(0) = 1
14. y + 2y = te−2t ,         y(1) = 0
         
15. ty + 2y = t − t + 1,
                    2
                                     y(1) = 21 , t > 0
       
16. y + (2/t)y = (cos t)/t ,    2
                                         y(π) = 0, t > 0
17. y − 2y = e2t ,         y(0) = 2
18. ty + 2y = sin t,         y(π/2) = 1, t > 0
19. t 3 y + 4t 2 y = e−t ,     y(−1) = 0, t < 0
         
20. ty + (t + 1)y = t,            y(ln 2) = 1, t > 0
In each of Problems 21 through 23:
(a) Draw a direction field for the given differential equation. How do solutions appear to
behave as t becomes large? Does the behavior depend on the choice of the initial value a?
Let a0 be the value of a for which the transition from one type of behavior to another occurs.
Estimate the value of a0 .
(b) Solve the initial value problem and find the critical value a0 exactly.
(c) Describe the behavior of the solution corresponding to the initial value a0 .
21. y − 21 y = 2 cos t,        y(0) = a
22. 2y − y = et/3 ,         y(0) = a
23. 3y − 2y = e−πt/2 ,          y(0) = a
In each of Problems 24 through 26:
(a) Draw a direction field for the given differential equation. How do solutions appear to
behave as t → 0? Does the behavior depend on the choice of the initial value a? Let a0 be the
value of a for which the transition from one type of behavior to another occurs. Estimate the
value of a0 .
(b) Solve the initial value problem and find the critical value a0 exactly.
(c) Describe the behavior of the solution corresponding to the initial value a0 .
24. ty + (t + 1)y = 2te−t ,          y(1) = a, t > 0
25. ty + 2y = (sin t)/t,          y(−π/2) = a, t < 0
26. (sin t)y + (cos t)y = et ,         y(1) = a, 0 < t < π
27. Consider the initial value problem
                                        y + 21 y = 2 cos t,       y(0) = −1.
    Find the coordinates of the first local maximum point of the solution for t > 0.
28. Consider the initial value problem
                                         y + 23 y = 1 − 21 t,     y(0) = y0 .
    Find the value of y0 for which the solution touches, but does not cross, the t-axis.
29. Consider the initial value problem
                                  y + 41 y = 3 + 2 cos 2t,     y(0) = 0.
    (a) Find the solution of this initial value problem and describe its behavior for large t.
    (b) Determine the value of t for which the solution first intersects the line y = 12.
30. Find the value of y0 for which the solution of the initial value problem
                                   y − y = 1 + 3 sin t,      y(0) = y0
    remains finite as t → ∞.
31. Consider the initial value problem
                                   y − 23 y = 3t + 2et ,    y(0) = y0 .
    Find the value of y0 that separates solutions that grow positively as t → ∞ from those
    that grow negatively. How does the solution that corresponds to this critical value of y0
    behave as t → ∞?
32. Show that all solutions of 2y + ty = 2 [Eq. (41) of the text] approach a limit as t → ∞,
    and find the limiting value.
    Hint: Consider the general solution, Eq. (47), and use L’Hôpital’s rule on the first term.
33. Show that if a and λ are positive constants, and b is any real number, then every solution
    of the equation
                                              y + ay = be−λt
    has the property that y → 0 as t → ∞.
    Hint: Consider the cases a = λ and a  = λ separately.
In each of Problems 34 through 37, construct a first order linear differential equation whose
solutions have the required behavior as t → ∞. Then solve your equation and confirm that
the solutions do indeed have the specified property.
34. All solutions have the limit 3 as t → ∞.
35. All solutions are asymptotic to the line y = 3 − t as t → ∞.
36. All solutions are asymptotic to the line y = 2t − 5 as t → ∞.
37. All solutions approach the curve y = 4 − t 2 as t → ∞.
38. Variation of Parameters. Consider the following method of solving the general linear
    equation of first order:
                                             y + p(t)y = g(t).                               (i)
    (a) If g(t) = 0 for all t, show that the solution is
                                                               
                                         y = A exp − p(t) dt ,                               (ii)
    where A is a constant.
    (b) If g(t) is not everywhere zero, assume that the solution of Eq. (i) is of the form
                                                                
                                      y = A(t) exp − p(t) dt ,                              (iii)
                    where A is now a function of t. By substituting for y in the given differential equation,
                    show that A(t) must satisfy the condition
                                                                             
                                                  A (t) = g(t) exp     p(t) dt .                         (iv)
                    (c) Find A(t) from Eq. (iv). Then substitute for A(t) in Eq. (iii) and determine y. Verify
                    that the solution obtained in this manner agrees with that of Eq. (33) in the text. This
                    technique is known as the method of variation of parameters; it is discussed in detail in
                    Section 3.6 in connection with second order linear equations.
               In each of Problems 39 through 42, use the method of Problem 38 to solve the given differential
               equation.
               39. y − 2y = t 2 e2t                            40. y + (1/t)y = 3 cos 2t,   t>0
                      
               41. ty + 2y = sin t,     t>0                     42. 2y + y = 3t 2
2.2 Separable Equations
               In Section 1.2 we used a process of direct integration to solve first order linear
               equations of the form
                                                         dy
                                                            = ay + b,                                     (1)
                                                         dt
               where a and b are constants. We will now show that this process is actually applicable
               to a much larger class of equations.
                  We will use x, rather than t, to denote the independent variable in this section for
               two reasons. In the first place, different letters are frequently used for the variables in
               a differential equation, and you should not become too accustomed to using a single
               pair. In particular, x often occurs as the independent variable. Further, we want to
               reserve t for another purpose later in the section.
                  The general first order equation is
                                                         dy
                                                            = f (x, y).                                   (2)
                                                         dx
               Linear equations were considered in the preceding section, but if Eq. (2) is nonlinear,
               then there is no universally applicable method for solving the equation. Here, we
               consider a subclass of first order equations that can be solved by direct integration.
                  To identify this class of equations, we first rewrite Eq. (2) in the form
                                                                      dy
                                                 M(x, y) + N(x, y)        = 0.                            (3)
                                                                      dx
               It is always possible to do this by setting M(x, y) = −f (x, y) and N(x, y) = 1, but there
               may be other ways as well. If it happens that M is a function of x only and N is a
               function of y only, then Eq. (3) becomes
                                                                   dy
                                                   M(x) + N(y)         = 0.                               (4)
                                                                   dx
        Such an equation is said to be separable, because if it is written in the differential
        form
                                            M(x) dx + N(y) dy = 0,                                    (5)
        then, if you wish, terms involving each variable may be placed on opposite sides
        of the equation. The differential form (5) is also more symmetric and tends to
        suppress the distinction between independent and dependent variables.
           A separable equation can be solved by integrating the functions M and N.
        We illustrate the process by an example and then discuss it in general for Eq. (4).
        Show that the equation
EXAMPLE
                                                    dy        x2
   1                                                    =                                             (6)
                                                    dx      1 − y2
        is separable, and then find an equation for its integral curves.
           If we write Eq. (6) as
                                                                 dy
                                               −x2 + (1 − y2 )      = 0,                              (7)
                                                                 dx
        then it has the form (4) and is therefore separable. Recall from calculus that if y is a function
        of x, then by the chain rule,
                                         d           d        dy           dy
                                            f (y) =     f (y)     = f  (y) .
                                         dx         dy        dx           dx
        For example, if f (y) = y − y3 /3, then
                                            d                            dy
                                               (y − y3 /3) = (1 − y2 ) .
                                            dx                           dx
        Thus the second term in Eq. (7) is the derivative with respect to x of y − y3 /3, and the first
        term is the derivative of −x3 /3. Thus Eq. (7) can be written as
                                              3              
                                          d      x         d        y3
                                               −      +         y−        = 0,
                                         dx       3       dx        3
        or
                                                  3
                                              d     x            y3
                                                   − +y−             = 0.
                                             dx      3           3
        Therefore, by integrating, we obtain
                                                 −x3 + 3y − y3 = c,                                   (8)
        where c is an arbitrary constant. Equation (8) is an equation for the integral curves of Eq. (6).
        A direction field and several integral curves are shown in Figure 2.2.1. Any differentiable
        function y = φ(x) that satisfies Eq. (8) is a solution of Eq. (6). An equation of the integral
        curve passing through a particular point (x0 , y0 ) can be found by substituting x0 and y0 for x
        and y, respectively, in Eq. (8) and determining the corresponding value of c.
                                              y
                                              4
                                              2
           –4               –2                                  2                4 x
                                             –2
                                            –4
           FIGURE 2.2.1     Direction field and integral curves of y = x2 /(1 − y2 ).
   Essentially the same procedure can be followed for any separable equation.
Returning to Eq. (4), let H1 and H2 be any antiderivatives of M and N, respectively.
Thus
                           H1 (x) = M(x),         H2 (y) = N(y),                     (9)
and Eq. (4) becomes
                                                     dy
                                   H1 (x) + H2 (y)    = 0.                          (10)
                                                     dx
If y is regarded as a function of x, then according to the chain rule,
                                  dy     d           dy     d
                          H2 (y)     =     H2 (y)      =     H2 (y).                 (11)
                                  dx     dy          dx    dx
Consequently, we can write Eq. (10) as
                                   d
                                      [H1 (x) + H2 (y)] = 0.                          (12)
                                   dx
By integrating Eq. (12), we obtain
                                     H1 (x) + H2 (y) = c,                             (13)
where c is an arbitrary constant. Any differentiable function y = φ(x) that satisfies
Eq. (13) is a solution of Eq. (4); in other words, Eq. (13) defines the solution implic-
itly rather than explicitly. In practice, Eq. (13) is usually obtained from Eq. (5) by
integrating the first term with respect to x and the second term with respect to y. The
justification for this is the argument that we have just given.
   The differential equation (4), together with an initial condition
                                          y(x0 ) = y0 ,                               (14)
        forms an initial value problem. To solve this initial value problem, we must determine
        the appropriate value for the constant c in Eq. (13). We do this by setting x = x0 and
        y = y0 in Eq. (13) with the result that
                                                c = H1 (x0 ) + H2 (y0 ).                               (15)
        Substituting this value of c in Eq. (13) and noting that
                                            x                                       y
                    H1 (x) − H1 (x0 ) =         M(s) ds,        H2 (y) − H2 (y0 ) =     N(s) ds,
                                             x0                                      y0
        we obtain                          x               y
                                                M(s) ds +       N(s) ds = 0.                           (16)
                                            x0              y0
        Equation (16) is an implicit representation of the solution of the differential equation
        (4) that also satisfies the initial condition (14). Bear in mind that to determine an
        explicit formula for the solution, you need to solve Eq. (16) for y as a function of x.
        Unfortunately, it is often impossible to do this analytically; in such cases you can
        resort to numerical methods to find approximate values of y for given values of x.
        Solve the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                        dy      3x2 + 4x + 2
   2                                         =                ,     y(0) = −1,                         (17)
                                        dx        2(y − 1)
        and determine the interval in which the solution exists.
           The differential equation can be written as
                                           2(y − 1) dy = (3x2 + 4x + 2) dx.
        Integrating the left side with respect to y and the right side with respect to x gives
                                             y2 − 2y = x3 + 2x2 + 2x + c,                              (18)
        where c is an arbitrary constant. To determine the solution satisfying the prescribed initial
        condition, we substitute x = 0 and y = −1 in Eq. (18), obtaining c = 3. Hence the solution of
        the initial value problem is given implicitly by
                                             y2 − 2y = x3 + 2x2 + 2x + 3.                              (19)
        To obtain the solution explicitly, we must solve Eq. (19) for y in terms of x. That is a simple
        matter in this case, since Eq. (19) is quadratic in y, and we obtain
                                                      
                                             y = 1 ± x3 + 2x2 + 2x + 4.                                (20)
        Equation (20) gives two solutions of the differential equation, only one of which, however,
        satisfies the given initial condition. This is the solution corresponding to the minus sign in
        Eq. (20), so we finally obtain
                                                         
                                         y = φ(x) = 1 − x3 + 2x2 + 2x + 4                              (21)
        as the solution of the initial value problem (17). Note that if we choose the plus sign by mistake
        in Eq. (20), then we obtain the solution of the same differential equation that satisfies the initial
        condition y(0) = 3. Finally, to determine the interval in which the solution (21) is valid, we must
        find the interval in which the quantity under the radical is positive. The only real zero of this
        expression is x = −2, so the desired interval is x > −2. Some integral curves of the differential
        equation are shown in Figure 2.2.2. The black curve passes through the point (0, −1) and thus
        is the solution of the initial value problem (17). Observe that the boundary of the interval
        of validity of the solution (21) is determined by the point (−2, 1) at which the tangent line is
        vertical.
                                                        y
                                                        3
                                                        2
                                  (–2, 1)               1
                               –2           –1                         1         2             x
                                                            (0, –1)
                                                       –1
                                                       –2
                      FIGURE 2.2.2 Integral curves of y = (3x2 + 4x + 2)/2(y − 1); the
                     solution satisfying y(0) = −1 is shown in black and is valid for x > −2.
        Solve the equation
EXAMPLE                                            dy     4x − x3
                                                       =                                             (22)
   3                                               dx      4 + y3
        and draw graphs of several integral curves. Also find the solution passing through the point
        (0, 1) and determine its interval of validity.
           Rewriting Eq. (22) as
                                            (4 + y3 ) dy = (4x − x3 ) dx,
        integrating each side, multiplying by 4, and rearranging the terms, we obtain
                                              y4 + 16y + x4 − 8x2 = c,                               (23)
        where c is an arbitrary constant. Any differentiable function y = φ(x) that satisfies Eq. (23)
        is a solution of the differential equation (22). Graphs of Eq. (23) for several values of c are
        shown in Figure 2.2.3.
           To find the particular solution passing through (0, 1), we set x = 0 and y = 1 in Eq. (23) with
        the result that c = 17. Thus the solution in question is given implicitly by
                                             y4 + 16y + x4 − 8x2 = 17.                               (24)
        It is shown by the black curve in Figure 2.2.3. The interval of validity of this solution extends
        on either side of the initial point as long as the function remains differentiable. From the
        figure we see that the interval ends when we reach points where the tangent line is verti-
        cal. It follows from the differential equation (22) that these are points where 4 + y3 = 0, or
                                              y
                                              2
                                              1
                  –3        –2       –1                      1      2        3
                                                                                     x
                                             –1
            (–3.3488, –1.5874)                                     (3.3488, –1.5874)
                                             –2
                                             –3
                   FIGURE 2.2.3 Integral curves of y = (4x − x3 )/(4 + y3 ).
                 The solution passing through (0, 1) is shown by the black curve.
y = (−4)1/3 = ∼ −1.5874. From Eq. (24) the corresponding values of x are x ∼  = ±3.3488. These
points are marked on the graph in Figure 2.2.3.
   Note 1: Sometimes an equation of the form (2)
                                          dy
                                              = f (x, y)
                                          dx
has a constant solution y = y0 . Such a solution is usually easy to find because if
f (x, y0 ) = 0 for some value y0 and for all x, then the constant function y = y0 is a
solution of the differential equation (2). For example, the equation
                                       dy    (y − 3) cos x
                                          =                                               (25)
                                       dx       1 + 2y2
has the constant solution y = 3. Other solutions of this equation can be found by
separating the variables and integrating.
   Note 2: The investigation of a first order nonlinear equation can sometimes be
facilitated by regarding both x and y as functions of a third variable t. Then
                                          dy    dy/dt
                                             =           .                                (26)
                                          dx    dx/dt
If the differential equation is
                                         dy     F(x, y)
                                             =             ,                              (27)
                                         dx     G(x, y)
         then, by comparing numerators and denominators in Eqs. (26) and (27), we obtain
         the system
                                      dx/dt = G(x, y),          dy/dt = F(x, y).                        (28)
         At first sight it may seem unlikely that a problem will be simplified by replacing a
         single equation by a pair of equations, but in fact, the system (28) may well be more
         amenable to investigation than the single equation (27). Chapter 9 is devoted to
         nonlinear systems of the form (28).
            Note 3: In Example 2 it was not difficult to solve explicitly for y as a function
         of x. However, this situation is exceptional, and often it will be better to leave the
         solution in implicit form, as in Examples 1 and 3. Thus, in the problems below and
         in other sections where nonlinear equations appear, the words “solve the following
         differential equation” mean to find the solution explicitly if it is convenient to do so,
         but otherwise to find an equation defining the solution implicitly.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 8, solve the given differential equation.
          1. y = x2 /y                                      2. y = x2 /y(1 + x3 )
          3. y + y2 sin x = 0                               4. y = (3x2 − 1)/(3 + 2y)
          5. y = (cos2 x)(cos2 2y)                          6. xy = (1 − y2 )1/2
              dy     x − e−x                                     dy       x2
          7.      =                                          8.     =
              dx      y + ey                                     dx    1 + y2
         In each of Problems 9 through 20:
         (a) Find the solution of the given initial value problem in explicit form.
         (b) Plot the graph of the solution.
         (c) Determine (at least approximately) the interval in which the solution is defined.
          9. y = (1 − 2x)y2 ,       y(0) = −1/6            10. y = (1 − 2x)/y,         y(1) = −2
                        −x
         11. x dx + ye dy = 0,          y(0) = 1            12. dr/dθ = r 2 /θ,      r(1) = 2
         13. y = 2x/(y + x2 y),       y(0) = −2            14. y = xy3 (1 + x2 )−1/2 ,     y(0) = 1
                                                                                                      √
         15. y = 2x/(1 + 2y),        y(2) = 0              16. y = x(x2 + 1)/4y3 ,        y(0) = −1/ 2
         17. y = (3x2 − ex )/(2y − 5),        y(0) = 1
         18. y = (e−x − ex )/(3 + 4y),        y(0) = 1
         19. sin 2x dx + cos 3y dy = 0,         y(π/2) = π/3
         20. y2 (1 − x2 )1/2 dy = arcsin x dx,      y(0) = 1
         Some of the results requested in Problems 21 through 28 can be obtained either by solving
         the given equations analytically or by plotting numerically generated approximations to the
         solutions. Try to form an opinion about the advantages and disadvantages of each approach.
         21. Solve the initial value problem
                                         y = (1 + 3x2 )/(3y2 − 6y),       y(0) = 1
             and determine the interval in which the solution is valid.
             Hint: To find the interval of definition, look for points where the integral curve has a
             vertical tangent.
22. Solve the initial value problem
                                   y = 3x2 /(3y2 − 4),       y(1) = 0
    and determine the interval in which the solution is valid.
    Hint: To find the interval of definition, look for points where the integral curve has a
    vertical tangent.
23. Solve the initial value problem
                                      y = 2y2 + xy2 ,    y(0) = 1
    and determine where the solution attains its minimum value.
24. Solve the initial value problem
                                 y = (2 − ex )/(3 + 2y),       y(0) = 0
    and determine where the solution attains its maximum value.
25. Solve the initial value problem
                                y = 2 cos 2x/(3 + 2y),        y(0) = −1
    and determine where the solution attains its maximum value.
26. Solve the initial value problem
                                 y = 2(1 + x)(1 + y2 ),       y(0) = 0
    and determine where the solution attains its minimum value.
27. Consider the initial value problem
                                    y = ty(4 − y)/3,      y(0) = y0 .
    (a) Determine how the behavior of the solution as t increases depends on the initial
    value y0 .
    (b) Suppose that y0 = 0.5. Find the time T at which the solution first reaches the value 3.98.
28. Consider the initial value problem
                             y = ty(4 − y)/(1 + t),       y(0) = y0 > 0.
    (a) Determine how the solution behaves as t → ∞.
    (b) If y0 = 2, find the time T at which the solution first reaches the value 3.99.
    (c) Find the range of initial values for which the solution lies in the interval 3.99 < y < 4.01
    by the time t = 2.
29. Solve the equation
                                             dy     ay + b
                                                 =          ,
                                             dx     cy + d
    where a, b, c, and d are constants.
    Homogeneous Equations. If the right side of the equation dy/dx = f (x, y) can
    be expressed as a function of the ratio y/x only, then the equation is said to be
    homogeneous.1 Such equations can always be transformed into separable equations
    by a change of the dependent variable. Problem 30 illustrates how to solve first order
    homogeneous equations.
30. Consider the equation
                                               dy      y − 4x
                                                   =          .                                      (i)
                                               dx       x−y
    (a) Show that Eq. (i) can be rewritten as
                                             dy      (y/x) − 4
                                                 =               ;                                  (ii)
                                             dx      1 − (y/x)
    thus Eq. (i) is homogeneous.
    (b) Introduce a new dependent variable v so that v = y/x, or y = xv(x). Express dy/dx in
    terms of x, v, and dv/dx.
    (c) Replace y and dy/dx in Eq. (ii) by the expressions from part (b) that involve v and
    dv/dx. Show that the resulting differential equation is
                                                   dv      v−4
                                            v+x        =          ,
                                                   dx      1−v
    or
                                                dv      v2 − 4
                                              x     =          .                                   (iii)
                                                dx      1−v
    Observe that Eq. (iii) is separable.
    (d) Solve Eq. (iii), obtaining v implicitly in terms of x.
    (e) Find the solution of Eq. (i) by replacing v by y/x in the solution in part (d).
    (f) Draw a direction field and some integral curves for Eq. (i). Recall that the right side
    of Eq. (i) actually depends only on the ratio y/x. This means that integral curves have
    the same slope at all points on any given straight line through the origin, although the
    slope changes from one line to another. Therefore, the direction field and the integral
    curves are symmetric with respect to the origin. Is this symmetry property evident from
    your plot?
    The method outlined in Problem 30 can be used for any homogeneous equation. That
    is, the substitution y = xv(x) transforms a homogeneous equation into a separable
    equation. The latter equation can be solved by direct integration, and then replacing v
    by y/x gives the solution to the original equation. In each of Problems 31 through 38:
    (a) Show that the given equation is homogeneous.
    (b) Solve the differential equation.
    (c) Draw a direction field and some integral curves. Are they symmetric with respect to
    the origin?
     dy     x2 + xy + y2                                  dy       x2 + 3y2
31.      =                                          32.      =
     dx          x2                                       dx          2xy
     dy     4y − 3x                                       dy         4x + 3y
33.      =                                          34.      =−
     dx     2x − y                                        dx          2x + y
1The word “homogeneous” has different meanings in different mathematical contexts. The homogeneous
equations considered here have nothing to do with the homogeneous equations that will occur in Chapter 3
and elsewhere.
                   dy     x + 3y
              35.       =                                   36. (x2 + 3xy + y2 ) dx − x2 dy = 0
                   dx      x−y
                   dy     x2 − 3y2                               dy    3y2 − x2
              37.       =                                   38.     =
                   dx        2xy                                 dx      2xy
2.3 Modeling with First Order Equations
              Differential equations are of interest to nonmathematicians primarily because of the
              possibility of using them to investigate a wide variety of problems in the physical,
              biological, and social sciences. One reason for this is that mathematical models and
              their solutions lead to equations relating the variables and parameters in the prob-
              lem. These equations often enable you to make predictions about how the natural
              process will behave in various circumstances. It is often easy to vary parameters in
              the mathematical model over wide ranges, whereas this may be very time-consuming
              or expensive, if not impossible, in an experimental setting. Nevertheless, mathemat-
              ical modeling and experiment or observation are both critically important and have
              somewhat complementary roles in scientific investigations. Mathematical models are
              validated by comparison of their predictions with experimental results. On the other
              hand, mathematical analyses may suggest the most promising directions to explore
              experimentally, and they may indicate fairly precisely what experimental data will
              be most helpful.
                 In Sections 1.1 and 1.2 we formulated and investigated a few simple mathemat-
              ical models. We begin by recapitulating and expanding on some of the conclusions
              reached in those sections. Regardless of the specific field of application, there are
              three identifiable steps that are always present in the process of mathematical
              modeling.
              Construction of the Model. In this step you translate the physical situation into math-
              ematical terms, often using the steps listed at the end of Section 1.1. Perhaps most
              critical at this stage is to state clearly the physical principle(s) that are believed to
              govern the process. For example, it has been observed that in some circumstances
              heat passes from a warmer to a cooler body at a rate proportional to the temperature
              difference, that objects move about in accordance with Newton’s laws of motion, and
              that isolated insect populations grow at a rate proportional to the current population.
              Each of these statements involves a rate of change (derivative) and consequently,
              when expressed mathematically, leads to a differential equation. The differential
              equation is a mathematical model of the process.
                 It is important to realize that the mathematical equations are almost always only
              an approximate description of the actual process. For example, bodies moving at
              speeds comparable to the speed of light are not governed by Newton’s laws, insect
              populations do not grow indefinitely as stated because of eventual lack of food or
              space, and heat transfer is affected by factors other than the temperature difference.
              Thus you should always be aware of the limitations of the model so that you will use
              it only when it is reasonable to believe that it is accurate. Alternatively, you can adopt
              the point of view that the mathematical equations exactly describe the operation of
        a simplified physical model, which has been constructed (or conceived of) so as to
        embody the most important features of the actual process. Sometimes, the process
        of mathematical modeling involves the conceptual replacement of a discrete process
        by a continuous one. For instance, the number of members in an insect population
        changes by discrete amounts; however, if the population is large, it seems reasonable
        to consider it as a continuous variable and even to speak of its derivative.
        Analysis of the Model. Once the problem has been formulated mathematically, you are
        often faced with the problem of solving one or more differential equations or, failing
        that, of finding out as much as possible about the properties of the solution. It may
        happen that this mathematical problem is quite difficult, and if so, further approxima-
        tions may be indicated at this stage to make the problem mathematically tractable.
        For example, a nonlinear equation may be approximated by a linear one, or a slowly
        varying coefficient may be replaced by a constant. Naturally, any such approxima-
        tions must also be examined from the physical point of view to make sure that the
        simplified mathematical problem still reflects the essential features of the physical
        process under investigation. At the same time, an intimate knowledge of the physics
        of the problem may suggest reasonable mathematical approximations that will make
        the mathematical problem more amenable to analysis. This interplay of understand-
        ing of physical phenomena and knowledge of mathematical techniques and their
        limitations is characteristic of applied mathematics at its best, and it is indispens-
        able in successfully constructing useful mathematical models of intricate physical
        processes.
        Comparison with Experiment or Observation. Finally, having obtained the solution (or at
        least some information about it), you must interpret this information in the con-
        text in which the problem arose. In particular, you should always check that the
        mathematical solution appears physically reasonable. If possible, calculate the values
        of the solution at selected points and compare them with experimentally observed
        values. Or ask whether the behavior of the solution after a long time is consistent
        with observations. Or examine the solutions corresponding to certain special values of
        parameters in the problem. Of course, the fact that the mathematical solution appears
        to be reasonable does not guarantee that it is correct. However, if the predictions of
        the mathematical model are seriously inconsistent with observations of the physical
        system it purports to describe, this suggests that errors have been made in solving
        the mathematical problem, that the mathematical model itself needs refinement, or
        that observations must be made with greater care.
            The examples in this section are typical of applications in which first order differ-
        ential equations arise.
        At time t = 0 a tank contains Q0 lb of salt dissolved in 100 gal of water; see Figure 2.3.1. Assume
EXAMPLE that water containing 14 lb of salt/gal is entering the tank at a rate of r gal/min and that the
   1    well-stirred mixture is draining from the tank at the same rate. Set up the initial value problem
        that describes this flow process. Find the amount of salt Q(t) in the tank at any time, and also
 Mixing find the limiting amount QL that is present after a very long time. If r = 3 and Q0 = 2QL , find
        the time T after which the salt level is within 2% of QL . Also find the flow rate that is required
        if the value of T is not to exceed 45 min.
            We assume that salt is neither created nor destroyed in the tank. Therefore, variations in
        the amount of salt are due solely to the flows in and out of the tank. More precisely, the rate
of change of salt in the tank, dQ/dt, is equal to the rate at which salt is flowing in minus the
rate at which it is flowing out. In symbols,
                                       dQ
                                           = rate in − rate out.                                (1)
                                       dt
The rate at which salt enters the tank is the concentration 14 lb/gal times the flow rate r gal/min,
or (r/4) lb/min. To find the rate at which salt leaves the tank, we need to multiply the concen-
tration of salt in the tank by the rate of outflow, r gal/min. Since the rates of flow in and out
are equal, the volume of water in the tank remains constant at 100 gal, and since the mixture
is “well-stirred,” the concentration throughout the tank is the same, namely, [Q(t)/100] lb/gal.
Therefore, the rate at which salt leaves the tank is [rQ(t)/100] lb/min. Thus the differential
equation governing this process is
                                           dQ     r     rQ
                                               = −          .                                   (2)
                                            dt    4 100
The initial condition is
                                             Q(0) = Q0 .                                        (3)
                                  1
                       r gal/min, 4 lb/gal
                                                              r gal/min
                          FIGURE 2.3.1 The water tank in Example 1.
    Upon thinking about the problem physically,we might anticipate that eventually the mixture
originally in the tank will be essentially replaced by the mixture flowing in,whose concentration
is 41 lb/gal. Consequently, we might expect that ultimately the amount of salt in the tank would
be very close to 25 lb. We can also find the limiting amount QL = 25 by setting dQ/dt equal
to zero in Eq. (2) and solving the resulting algebraic equation for Q.
    To solve the initial value problem (2), (3) analytically, note that Eq. (2) is both linear and
separable. Rewriting it in the standard form for a linear equation, we have
                                           dQ     rQ      r
                                               +      = .                                       (4)
                                            dt    100     4
Thus the integrating factor is ert/100 and the general solution is
                                        Q(t) = 25 + ce−rt/100 ,                                 (5)
where c is an arbitrary constant.To satisfy the initial condition (3),we must choose c = Q0 − 25.
Therefore, the solution of the initial value problem (2), (3) is
                                    Q(t) = 25 + (Q0 − 25)e−rt/100 ,                             (6)
or
                                Q(t) = 25(1 − e−rt/100 ) + Q0 e−rt/100 .                        (7)
From Eq. (6) or (7), you can see that Q(t) → 25 (lb) as t → ∞, so the limiting value QL is
25, confirming our physical intuition. Further, Q(t) approaches the limit more rapidly as r
increases. In interpreting the solution (7), note that the second term on the right side is the
portion of the original salt that remains at time t, while the first term gives the amount of salt in
the tank as a consequence of the flow processes. Plots of the solution for r = 3 and for several
values of Q0 are shown in Figure 2.3.2.
              Q
             50
             40
             30
             20
             10
                             20          40           60           80         100    t
                 FIGURE 2.3.2 Solutions of the initial value problem (2), (3):
            dQ/dt = (r/4) − rQ/100, Q(0) = Q0 for r = 3 and several values of Q0 .
   Now suppose that r = 3 and Q0 = 2QL = 50; then Eq. (6) becomes
                                       Q(t) = 25 + 25e−0.03t .                                  (8)
Since 2% of 25 is 0.5, we wish to find the time T at which Q(t) has the value 25.5. Substituting
t = T and Q = 25.5 in Eq. (8) and solving for T, we obtain
                                  T = (ln 50)/0.03 ∼= 130.4 (min).                              (9)
   To determine r so that T = 45, return to Eq. (6), set t = 45, Q0 = 50, Q(t) = 25.5, and solve
for r. The result is
                                 r = (100/45) ln 50 ∼= 8.69 gal/min.                           (10)
   Since this example is hypothetical, the validity of the model is not in question. If the flow
rates are as stated, and if the concentration of salt in the tank is uniform, then the differential
equation (1) is an accurate description of the flow process. Although this particular example
has no special significance, models of this kind are often used in problems involving a pollutant
in a lake, or a drug in an organ of the body, for example, rather than a tank of salt water. In
such cases the flow rates may not be easy to determine or may vary with time. Similarly, the
concentration may be far from uniform in some cases. Finally, the rates of inflow and outflow
may be different, which means that the variation of the amount of liquid in the problem must
also be taken into account.
          Suppose that a sum of money is deposited in a bank or money fund that pays interest at an
EXAMPLE   annual rate r. The value S(t) of the investment at any time t depends on the frequency with
    2     which interest is compounded as well as on the interest rate. Financial institutions have various
          policies concerning compounding: some compound monthly, some weekly, some even daily.
Compound  If we assume that compounding takes place continuously, then we can set up an initial value
 Interest problem that describes the growth of the investment.
             The rate of change of the value of the investment is dS/dt, and this quantity is equal to
          the rate at which interest accrues, which is the interest rate r times the current value of the
          investment S(t). Thus
                                                       dS/dt = rS                                         (11)
          is the differential equation that governs the process. Suppose that we also know the value of
          the investment at some particular time, say,
                                                        S(0) = S0 .                                       (12)
          Then the solution of the initial value problem (11), (12) gives the balance S(t) in the account
          at any time t. This initial value problem is readily solved, since the differential equation (11)
          is both linear and separable. Consequently, by solving Eqs. (11) and (12), we find that
                                                      S(t) = S0 ert .                                     (13)
          Thus a bank account with continuously compounding interest grows exponentially.
              Let us now compare the results from this continuous model with the situation in which
          compounding occurs at finite time intervals. If interest is compounded once a year, then after
          t years
                                                   S(t) = S0 (1 + r)t .
          If interest is compounded twice a year, then at the end of 6 months the value of the investment
          is S0 [1 + (r/2)], and at the end of 1 year it is S0 [1 + (r/2)]2 . Thus, after t years we have
                                                                    r 2t
                                                  S(t) = S0 1 +          .
                                                                    2
          In general, if interest is compounded m times per year, then
                                                                    r mt
                                                 S(t) = S0 1 +            .                               (14)
                                                                   m
          The relation between formulas (13) and (14) is clarified if we recall from calculus that
                                                               r mt
                                               lim S0 1 +            = S0 ert .
                                              m→∞             m
             The same model applies equally well to more general investments in which dividends and
          perhaps capital gains can also accumulate, as well as interest. In recognition of this fact, we
          will from now on refer to r as the rate of return.
             Table 2.3.1 shows the effect of changing the frequency of compounding for a return rate
          r of 8%. The second and third columns are calculated from Eq. (14) for quarterly and daily
          compounding, respectively, and the fourth column is calculated from Eq. (13) for continuous
          compounding. The results show that the frequency of compounding is not particularly impor-
          tant in most cases. For example, during a 10-year period the difference between quarterly
          and continuous compounding is $17.50 per $1000 invested, or less than $2/year. The differ-
          ence would be somewhat greater for higher rates of return and less for lower rates. From the
          first row in the table, we see that for the return rate r = 8%, the annual yield for quarterly
          compounding is 8.24% and for daily or continuous compounding it is 8.33%.
              Returning now to the case of continuous compounding, let us suppose that there may be
          deposits or withdrawals in addition to the accrual of interest, dividends, or capital gains. If
                   TABLE 2.3.1 Growth of Capital at a Return Rate r = 8%
                   for Several Modes of Compounding
                                  S(t)/S(t0 ) from Eq. (14)
                                                                    S(t)/S(t0 )
                      Years        m=4            m = 365         from Eq. (13)
                         1          1.0824          1.0833            1.0833
                         2          1.1717          1.1735            1.1735
                         5          1.4859          1.4918            1.4918
                        10          2.2080          2.2253            2.2255
                        20          4.8754          4.9522            4.9530
                        30        10.7652          11.0203           11.0232
                        40        23.7699          24.5239           24.5325
we assume that the deposits or withdrawals take place at a constant rate k, then Eq. (11) is
replaced by
                                          dS/dt = rS + k,
or, in standard form,
                                          dS/dt − rS = k,                                     (15)
where k is positive for deposits and negative for withdrawals.
   Equation (15) is linear with the integrating factor e−rt , so its general solution is
                                         S(t) = cert − (k/r),
where c is an arbitrary constant. To satisfy the initial condition (12), we must choose
c = S0 + (k/r). Thus the solution of the initial value problem (15), (12) is
                                    S(t) = S0 ert + (k/r)(ert − 1).                           (16)
The first term in expression (16) is the part of S(t) that is due to the return accumulated on
the initial amount S0 , and the second term is the part that is due to the deposit or withdrawal
rate k.
   The advantage of stating the problem in this general way without specific values for S0 , r, or
k lies in the generality of the resulting formula (16) for S(t). With this formula we can readily
compare the results of different investment programs or different rates of return.
   For instance, suppose that one opens an individual retirement account (IRA) at age 25 and
makes annual investments of $2000 thereafter in a continuous manner. Assuming a rate of
return of 8%, what will be the balance in the IRA at age 65? We have S0 = 0, r = 0.08, and
k = $2000, and we wish to determine S(40). From Eq. (16) we have
                              S(40) = (25,000)(e3.2 − 1) = $588,313.                          (17)
It is interesting to note that the total amount invested is $80,000, so the remaining amount of
$508,313 results from the accumulated return on the investment. The balance after 40 years
is also fairly sensitive to the assumed rate. For instance, S(40) = $508,948 if r = 0.075 and
S(40) = $681,508 if r = 0.085.
   Let us now examine the assumptions that have gone into the model. First, we have assumed
that the return is compounded continuously and that additional capital is invested continu-
ously. Neither of these is true in an actual financial situation. We have also assumed that the
return rate r is constant for the entire period involved, whereas in fact it is likely to fluctuate
considerably. Although we cannot reliably predict future rates, we can use expression (16) to
             determine the approximate effect of different rate projections. It is also possible to consider
             r and k in Eq. (15) to be functions of t rather than constants; in that case, of course, the solution
             may be much more complicated than Eq. (16).
                The initial value problem (15), (12) and the solution (16) can also be used to analyze a
             number of other financial situations, including annuities, mortgages, and automobile loans.
             Consider a pond that initially contains 10 million gal of fresh water. Water containing an
 EXAMPLE     undesirable chemical flows into the pond at the rate of 5 million gal/yr, and the mixture in
     3       the pond flows out at the same rate. The concentration γ(t) of chemical in the incoming water
             varies periodically with time according to the expression γ(t) = 2 + sin 2t g/gal. Construct a
Chemicals in mathematical model of this flow process and determine the amount of chemical in the pond
  a Po n d   at any time. Plot the solution and describe in words the effect of the variation in the incoming
             concentration.
                Since the incoming and outgoing flows of water are the same, the amount of water in the
             pond remains constant at 107 gal. Let us denote time by t, measured in years, and the chemical
             by Q(t), measured in grams. This example is similar to Example 1, and the same inflow/outflow
             principle applies. Thus
                                                   dQ
                                                        = rate in − rate out,
                                                   dt
             where “rate in” and “rate out” refer to the rates at which the chemical flows into and out of
             the pond, respectively. The rate at which the chemical flows in is given by
                                         rate in = (5 × 106 ) gal/yr (2 + sin 2t) g/gal.                      (18)
                                                                        7
             The concentration of chemical in the pond is Q(t)/10 g/gal, so the rate of flow out is
                                 rate out = (5 × 106 ) gal/yr [Q(t)/107 ] g/gal = Q(t)/2 g/yr.                (19)
             Thus we obtain the differential equation
                                              dQ                               Q(t)
                                                  = (5 × 106 )(2 + sin 2t) −        ,                         (20)
                                              dt                                 2
             where each term has the units of g/yr.
                To make the coefficients more manageable, it is convenient to introduce a new dependent
             variable defined by q(t) = Q(t)/106 , or Q(t) = 106 q(t). This means that q(t) is measured in
             millions of grams, or megagrams (metric tons). If we make this substitution in Eq. (20), then
             each term contains the factor 106 ,which can be canceled. If we also transpose the term involving
             q(t) to the left side of the equation, we finally have
                                                   dq 1
                                                       + 2 q = 10 + 5 sin 2t.                                 (21)
                                                   dt
             Originally, there is no chemical in the pond, so the initial condition is
                                                            q(0) = 0.                                         (22)
                Equation (21) is linear, and although the right side is a function of time, the coefficient
             of q is a constant. Thus the integrating factor is et/2 . Multiplying Eq. (21) by this factor and
             integrating the resulting equation, we obtain the general solution
                                           q(t) = 20 − 40
                                                        17
                                                           cos 2t + 10
                                                                    17
                                                                       sin 2t + ce−t/2 .                      (23)
             The initial condition (22) requires that c = −300/17, so the solution of the initial value problem
             (21), (22) is
                                          q(t) = 20 − 40
                                                       17
                                                          cos 2t + 10
                                                                   17
                                                                      sin 2t − 300
                                                                                17
                                                                                   e−t/2 .                    (24)
                A plot of the solution (24) is shown in Figure 2.3.3, along with the line q = 20. The exponential
                term in the solution is important for small t, but it diminishes rapidly as t increases. Later, the
                solution consists of an oscillation, due to the sin 2t and cos 2t terms, about the constant level
                q = 20. Note that if the sin 2t term were not present in Eq. (21), then q = 20 would be the
                equilibrium solution of that equation.
                              q
                             22
                             20
                             18
                             16
                             14
                             12
                             10
                              8
                              6
                              4
                              2
                                       2     4      6       8    10     12     14    16     18     20   t
                                 FIGURE 2.3.3 Solution of the initial value problem (21), (22):
                                               dq/dt + 21 q = 10 + 5 sin 2t, q(0) = 0.
                    Let us now consider the adequacy of the mathematical model itself for this problem.
                The model rests on several assumptions that have not yet been stated explicitly. In the first
                place, the amount of water in the pond is controlled entirely by the rates of flow in and out—
                none is lost by evaporation or by seepage into the ground, and none is gained by rainfall.
                The same is true of the chemical; it flows into and out of the pond, but none is absorbed by
                fish or other organisms living in the pond. In addition, we assume that the concentration of
                chemical in the pond is uniform throughout the pond. Whether the results obtained from the
                model are accurate depends strongly on the validity of these simplifying assumptions.
                A body of constant mass m is projected away from the earth in a direction perpendicular to the
EXAMPLE         earth’s surface with an initial velocity v0 . Assuming that there is no air resistance, but taking
      4         into account the variation of the earth’s gravitational field with distance, find an expression
                for the velocity during the ensuing motion. Also find the initial velocity that is required to
 Escape         lift the body to a given maximum altitude ξ above the surface of the earth, and find the
 Ve l o c i t y least initial velocity for which the body will not return to the earth; the latter is the escape
                velocity.
                    Let the positive x-axis point away from the center of the earth along the line of motion with
                x = 0 lying on the earth’s surface; see Figure 2.3.4. The figure is drawn horizontally to remind
                you that gravity is directed toward the center of the earth, which is not necessarily downward
                from a perspective away from the earth’s surface. The gravitational force acting on the body
                (that is, its weight) is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the center of
                the earth and is given by w(x) = −k/(x + R)2 , where k is a constant, R is the radius of the
                earth, and the minus sign signifies that w(x) is directed in the negative x direction. We know
                             R                              mgR 2
                                                          (R + x)2
                                                                  m              x
                   FIGURE 2.3.4 A body in the earth’s gravitational field.
that on the earth’s surface w(0) is given by −mg, where g is the acceleration due to gravity at
sea level. Therefore, k = mgR2 and
                                                     mgR2
                                       w(x) = −              .                                (25)
                                                  (R + x)2
Since there are no other forces acting on the body, the equation of motion is
                                          dv         mgR2
                                       m      =−              ,                               (26)
                                          dt       (R + x)2
and the initial condition is
                                             v(0) = v0 .                                      (27)
   Unfortunately, Eq. (26) involves too many variables since it depends on t, x, and v. To
remedy this situation, we can eliminate t from Eq. (26) by thinking of x, rather than t, as the
independent variable. Then we can express dv/dt in terms of dv/dx by using the chain rule;
hence
                                      dv      dv dx       dv
                                           =           =v ,
                                       dt     dx dt       dx
and Eq. (26) is replaced by
                                         dv           gR2
                                       v     =−              .                                (28)
                                         dx       (R + x)2
Equation (28) is separable but not linear, so by separating the variables and integrating, we
obtain
                                         v2      gR2
                                             =          + c.                                  (29)
                                          2     R+x
Since x = 0 when t = 0, the initial condition (27) at t = 0 can be replaced by the condition that
v = v0 when x = 0. Hence c = (v20 /2) − gR and
                                                          2gR2
                                   v = ± v20 − 2gR +            .                             (30)
                                                          R+x
Note that Eq. (30) gives the velocity as a function of altitude rather than as a function of time.
The plus sign must be chosen if the body is rising, and the minus sign must be chosen if it is
falling back to earth.
   To determine the maximum altitude ξ that the body reaches, we set v = 0 and x = ξ in
Eq. (30) and then solve for ξ, obtaining
                                                  v20 R
                                          ξ=              .                                   (31)
                                               2gR − v20
         Solving Eq. (31) for v0 , we find the initial velocity required to lift the body to the altitude ξ,
         namely,
                                                                 ξ
                                                   v0 =   2gR         .                                 (32)
                                                               R+ξ
         The escape velocity ve is then found by letting ξ → ∞. Consequently,
                                                           
                                                      ve = 2gR.                                         (33)
         The numerical value of ve is approximately 6.9 mi/s, or 11.1 km/s.
            The preceding calculation of the escape velocity neglects the effect of air resistance, so the
         actual escape velocity (including the effect of air resistance) is somewhat higher. On the other
         hand, the effective escape velocity can be significantly reduced if the body is transported a
         considerable distance above sea level before being launched. Both gravitational and frictional
         forces are thereby reduced; air resistance, in particular, diminishes quite rapidly with increasing
         altitude. You should keep in mind also that it may well be impractical to impart too large an
         initial velocity instantaneously; space vehicles, for instance, receive their initial acceleration
         during a period of a few minutes.
PROBLEMS  1. Consider a tank used in certain hydrodynamic experiments. After one experiment the
              tank contains 200 L of a dye solution with a concentration of 1 g/L. To prepare for
              the next experiment, the tank is to be rinsed with fresh water flowing in at a rate of
              2 L/min, the well-stirred solution flowing out at the same rate. Find the time that will
              elapse before the concentration of dye in the tank reaches 1% of its original value.
          2. A tank initially contains 120 L of pure water. A mixture containing a concentration of
              γ g/L of salt enters the tank at a rate of 2 L/min, and the well-stirred mixture leaves the
              tank at the same rate. Find an expression in terms of γ for the amount of salt in the tank
              at any time t. Also find the limiting amount of salt in the tank as t → ∞.
           3. A tank originally contains 100 gal of fresh water. Then water containing 21 lb of salt per
              gallon is poured into the tank at a rate of 2 gal/min, and the mixture is allowed to leave at
              the same rate. After 10 min the process is stopped, and fresh water is poured into the tank
              at a rate of 2 gal/min, with the mixture again leaving at the same rate. Find the amount of
              salt in the tank at the end of an additional 10 min.
          4. A tank with a capacity of 500 gal originally contains 200 gal of water with 100 lb of salt
              in solution. Water containing 1 lb of salt per gallon is entering at a rate of 3 gal/min, and
              the mixture is allowed to flow out of the tank at a rate of 2 gal/min. Find the amount
              of salt in the tank at any time prior to the instant when the solution begins to overflow.
              Find the concentration (in pounds per gallon) of salt in the tank when it is on the point
              of overflowing. Compare this concentration with the theoretical limiting concentration if
              the tank had infinite capacity.
          5. A tank contains 100 gal of water and 50 oz of salt. Water containing a salt concentration of
              1
              4
                (1 + 21 sin t) oz/gal flows into the tank at a rate of 2 gal/min, and the mixture in the tank
              flows out at the same rate.
              (a) Find the amount of salt in the tank at any time.
              (b) Plot the solution for a time period long enough so that you see the ultimate behavior
              of the graph.
              (c) The long-time behavior of the solution is an oscillation about a certain constant level.
              What is this level? What is the amplitude of the oscillation?
  6. Suppose that a tank containing a certain liquid has an outlet near the bottom. Let h(t)
      be the height of the liquid surface above the outlet at time t. Torricelli’s2 principle states
      that the outflow velocity v at the outlet is equal to the velocity of a particle falling freely
      (with no drag) from the height h.
                              
      (a) Show that v = 2gh, where g is the acceleration due to gravity.
      (b) By equating the rate of outflow to the rate of change of liquid in the tank, show that
      h(t) satisfies the equation
                                                    dh          
                                             A(h)       = −αa 2gh,                                     (i)
                                                    dt
      where A(h) is the area of the cross section of the tank at height h and a is the area of the
      outlet. The constant α is a contraction coefficient that accounts for the observed fact that
      the cross section of the (smooth) outflow stream is smaller than a. The value of α for water
      is about 0.6.
      (c) Consider a water tank in the form of a right circular cylinder that is 3 m high above
      the outlet. The radius of the tank is 1 m, and the radius of the circular outlet is 0.1 m.
      If the tank is initially full of water, determine how long it takes to drain the tank down to
      the level of the outlet.
  7. Suppose that a sum S0 is invested at an annual rate of return r compounded continuously.
      (a) Find the time T required for the original sum to double in value as a function of r.
      (b) Determine T if r = 7%.
      (c) Find the return rate that must be achieved if the initial investment is to double in
      8 years.
  8. A young person with no initial capital invests k dollars per year at an annual rate of
      return r. Assume that investments are made continuously and that the return is
      compounded continuously.
      (a) Determine the sum S(t) accumulated at any time t.
      (b) If r = 7.5%, determine k so that $1 million will be available for retirement in 40 years.
      (c) If k = $2000/year, determine the return rate r that must be obtained to have $1 million
      available in 40 years.
  9. A certain college graduate borrows $8000 to buy a car. The lender charges interest at
      an annual rate of 10%. Assuming that interest is compounded continuously and that
      the borrower makes payments continuously at a constant annual rate k, determine the
      payment rate k that is required to pay off the loan in 3 years. Also determine how much
      interest is paid during the 3-year period.
10. A home buyer can afford to spend no more than $1500/month on mortgage payments.
      Suppose that the interest rate is 6%, that interest is compounded continuously, and that
      payments are also made continuously.
      (a) Determine the maximum amount that this buyer can afford to borrow on a 20-year
      mortgage; on a 30-year mortgage.
      (b) Determine the total interest paid during the term of the mortgage in each of the cases
      in part (a).
2 Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647), successor to Galileo as court mathematician in Florence, published
this result in 1644. He is also known for constructing the first mercury barometer and for making important
contributions to geometry.
11. A home buyer wishes to borrow $250,000 at an interest rate of 6% to finance the pur-
     chase. Assume that interest is compounded continuously and that payments are also made
     continuously.
     (a) Determine the monthly payment that is required to pay off the loan in 20 years;
     in 30 years.
     (b) Determine the total interest paid during the term of the loan in each of the cases in
     part (a).
12. A recent college graduate borrows $150,000 at an interest rate of 6% to purchase a con-
     dominium. Anticipating steady salary increases, the buyer expects to make payments at a
     monthly rate of 800 + 10t, where t is the number of months since the loan was made.
     (a) Assuming that this payment schedule can be maintained, when will the loan be fully
     paid?
     (b) Assuming the same payment schedule, how large a loan could be paid off in exactly
     20 years?
13. An important tool in archeological research is radiocarbon dating, developed by the
     American chemist Willard F. Libby.3 This is a means of determining the age of certain wood
     and plant remains, and hence of animal or human bones or artifacts found buried at the
     same levels. Radiocarbon dating is based on the fact that some wood or plant remains con-
     tain residual amounts of carbon-14,a radioactive isotope of carbon.This isotope is accumu-
     lated during the lifetime of the plant and begins to decay at its death. Since the half-life of
     carbon-14 is long (approximately 5730 years4 ), measurable amounts of carbon-14 remain
     after many thousands of years. If even a tiny fraction of the original amount of carbon-14
     is still present, then by appropriate laboratory measurements the proportion of the orig-
     inal amount of carbon-14 that remains can be accurately determined. In other words, if
     Q(t) is the amount of carbon-14 at time t and Q0 is the original amount, then the ratio
     Q(t)/Q0 can be determined, as long as this quantity is not too small. Present measurement
     techniques permit the use of this method for time periods of 50,000 years or more.
     (a) Assuming that Q satisfies the differential equation Q = −rQ, determine the decay
     constant r for carbon-14.
     (b) Find an expression for Q(t) at any time t, if Q(0) = Q0 .
     (c) Suppose that certain remains are discovered in which the current residual amount of
     carbon-14 is 20% of the original amount. Determine the age of these remains.
14. Suppose that a certain population has a growth rate that varies with time and that this
     population satisfies the differential equation
                                         dy/dt = (0.5 + sin t)y/5.
     (a) If y(0) = 1, find (or estimate) the time τ at which the population has doubled. Choose
     other initial conditions and determine whether the doubling time τ depends on the initial
     population.
     (b) Suppose that the growth rate is replaced by its average value 1/10. Determine the
     doubling time τ in this case.
3Willard F. Libby (1908–1980) was born in rural Colorado and received his education at the University of
California at Berkeley. He developed the method of radiocarbon dating beginning in 1947 while he was
at the University of Chicago. For this work he was awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1960.
4 McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology (8th ed.) (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997), Vol. 5,
p. 48.
     (c) Suppose that the term sin t in the differential equation is replaced by sin 2πt; that is,
     the variation in the growth rate has a substantially higher frequency. What effect does this
     have on the doubling time τ?
     (d) Plot the solutions obtained in parts (a), (b), and (c) on a single set of axes.
15. Suppose that a certain population satisfies the initial value problem
                                    dy/dt = r(t)y − k,          y(0) = y0 ,
     where the growth rate r(t) is given by r(t) = (1 + sin t)/5, and k represents the rate of
     predation.
     (a) Suppose that k = 1/5. Plot y versus t for several values of y0 between 1/2 and 1.
     (b) Estimate the critical initial population yc below which the population will become
     extinct.
     (c) Choose other values of k and find the corresponding yc for each one.
     (d) Use the data you have found in parts (b) and (c) to plot yc versus k.
16. Newton’s law of cooling states that the temperature of an object changes at a rate pro-
     portional to the difference between its temperature and that of its surroundings. Suppose
     that the temperature of a cup of coffee obeys Newton’s law of cooling. If the coffee has a
     temperature of 200◦ F when freshly poured, and 1 min later has cooled to 190◦ F in a room
     at 70◦ F, determine when the coffee reaches a temperature of 150◦ F.
17. Heat transfer from a body to its surroundings by radiation, based on the Stefan–
     Boltzmann5 law, is described by the differential equation
                                            du
                                                 = −α(u4 − T 4 ),                                      (i)
                                             dt
     where u(t) is the absolute temperature of the body at time t, T is the absolute temperature
     of the surroundings, and α is a constant depending on the physical parameters of the body.
     However, if u is much larger than T, then solutions of Eq. (i) are well approximated by
     solutions of the simpler equation
                                                 du
                                                     = −αu4 .                                         (ii)
                                                 dt
     Suppose that a body with initial temperature 2000 K is surrounded by a medium with
     temperature 300 K and that α = 2.0 × 10−12 K−3 /s.
     (a) Determine the temperature of the body at any time by solving Eq. (ii).
     (b) Plot the graph of u versus t.
     (c) Find the time τ at which u(τ) = 600—that is, twice the ambient temperature. Up to this
     time the error in using Eq. (ii) to approximate the solutions of Eq. (i) is no more than 1%.
18. Consider an insulated box (a building, perhaps) with internal temperature u(t). According
     to Newton’s law of cooling, u satisfies the differential equation
                                            du
                                                 = −k[u − T(t)],                                       (i)
                                            dt
     where T(t) is the ambient (external) temperature. Suppose that T(t) varies sinusoidally;
     for example, assume that T(t) = T0 + T1 cos ωt.
5 Jozef Stefan (1835–1893), professor of physics at Vienna, stated the radiation law on empirical grounds
in 1879. His student Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906) derived it theoretically from the principles of
thermodynamics in 1884. Boltzmann is best known for his pioneering work in statistical mechanics.
     (a) Solve Eq. (i) and express u(t) in terms of t, k, T0 , T1 , and ω. Observe that part of
     your solution approaches zero as t becomes large; this is called the transient part. The
     remainder of the solution is called the steady state; denote it by S(t).
     (b) Suppose that t is measured in hours and that ω = π/12, corresponding to a period of
     24 h for T(t). Further, let T0 = 60◦ F, T1 = 15◦ F, and k = 0.2/h. Draw graphs of S(t) and
     T(t) versus t on the same axes. From your graph estimate the amplitude R of the oscillatory
     part of S(t). Also estimate the time lag τ between corresponding maxima of T(t) and S(t).
     (c) Let k, T0 , T1 , and ω now be unspecified. Write the oscillatory part of S(t) in the form
     R cos[ω(t − τ)]. Use trigonometric identities to find expressions for R and τ. Let T1 and ω
     have the values given in part (b), and plot graphs of R and τ versus k.
19. Consider a lake of constant volume V containing at time t an amount Q(t) of pollutant,
     evenly distributed throughout the lake with a concentration c(t), where c(t) = Q(t)/V.
    Assume that water containing a concentration k of pollutant enters the lake at a rate r,
     and that water leaves the lake at the same rate. Suppose that pollutants are also added
     directly to the lake at a constant rate P. Note that the given assumptions neglect a number
     of factors that may, in some cases, be important—for example, the water added or lost
     by precipitation, absorption, and evaporation; the stratifying effect of temperature differ-
     ences in a deep lake; the tendency of irregularities in the coastline to produce sheltered
     bays; and the fact that pollutants are deposited unevenly throughout the lake but (usually)
     at isolated points around its periphery. The results below must be interpreted in the light
     of the neglect of such factors as these.
     (a) If at time t = 0 the concentration of pollutant is c0 , find an expression for the
     concentration c(t) at any time. What is the limiting concentration as t → ∞?
     (b) If the addition of pollutants to the lake is terminated (k = 0 and P = 0 for t > 0),
     determine the time interval T that must elapse before the concentration of pollutants is
     reduced to 50% of its original value; to 10% of its original value.
     (c) Table 2.3.2 contains data6 for several of the Great Lakes. Using these data, determine
     from part (b) the time T that is needed to reduce the contamination of each of these lakes
     to 10% of the original value.
                     TABLE 2.3.2 Volume and Flow Data for the Great
                     Lakes
                            Lake           V (km3 × 103 )         r (km3 /year)
                          Superior             12.2                    65.2
                          Michigan               4.9                  158
                          Erie                   0.46                 175
                          Ontario                1.6                  209
20. A ball with mass 0.15 kg is thrown upward with initial velocity 20 m/s from the roof of a
     building 30 m high. Neglect air resistance.
     (a) Find the maximum height above the ground that the ball reaches.
     (b) Assuming that the ball misses the building on the way down, find the time that it hits
     the ground.
     (c) Plot the graphs of velocity and position versus time.
6This problem is based on R. H. Rainey, “Natural Displacement of Pollution from the Great Lakes,”
Science 155 (1967), pp. 1242–1243; the information in the table was taken from that source.
21. Assume that the conditions are as in Problem 20 except that there is a force due to air
    resistance of magnitude |v|/30 directed opposite to the velocity, where the velocity v is
    measured in m/s.
    (a) Find the maximum height above the ground that the ball reaches.
    (b) Find the time that the ball hits the ground.
    (c) Plot the graphs of velocity and position versus time. Compare these graphs with the
    corresponding ones in Problem 20.
22. Assume that the conditions are as in Problem 20 except that there is a force due to air
    resistance of magnitude v2 /1325 directed opposite to the velocity, where the velocity v is
    measured in m/s.
    (a) Find the maximum height above the ground that the ball reaches.
    (b) Find the time that the ball hits the ground.
    (c) Plot the graphs of velocity and position versus time. Compare these graphs with the
    corresponding ones in Problems 20 and 21.
23. A skydiver weighing 180 lb (including equipment) falls vertically downward from an alti-
    tude of 5000 ft and opens the parachute after 10 s of free fall. Assume that the force
    of air resistance, which is directed opposite to the velocity, is of magnitude 0.75|v| when
    the parachute is closed and is of magnitude 12|v| when the parachute is open, where the
    velocity v is measured in ft/s.
    (a) Find the speed of the skydiver when the parachute opens.
    (b) Find the distance fallen before the parachute opens.
    (c) What is the limiting velocity vL after the parachute opens?
    (d) Determine how long the sky diver is in the air after the parachute opens.
    (e) Plot the graph of velocity versus time from the beginning of the fall until the skydiver
    reaches the ground.
24. A rocket sled having an initial speed of 150 mi/h is slowed by a channel of water. Assume
    that during the braking process, the acceleration a is given by a(v) = −μv2 , where v is the
    velocity and μ is a constant.
    (a) As in Example 4 in the text, use the relation dv/dt = v(dv/dx) to write the equation
    of motion in terms of v and x.
    (b) If it requires a distance of 2000 ft to slow the sled to 15 mi/h, determine the value of μ.
    (c) Find the time τ required to slow the sled to 15 mi/h.
25. A body of constant mass m is projected vertically upward with an initial velocity v0
    in a medium offering a resistance k|v|, where k is a constant. Neglect changes in the
    gravitational force.
    (a) Find the maximum height xm attained by the body and the time tm at which this
    maximum height is reached.
    (b) Show that if kv0 /mg < 1, then tm and xm can be expressed as
                                                                       
                                    v0        1 kv0     1 kv0 2
                              tm =       1−          +             − ··· ,
                                    g         2 mg      3 mg
                                                                       
                                    v2        2 kv0     1 kv0 2
                              xm = 0 1 −             +             − ··· .
                                    2g        3 mg      2 mg
    (c) Show that the quantity kv0 /mg is dimensionless.
26. A body of mass m is projected vertically upward with an initial velocity v0 in a medium
    offering a resistance k|v|, where k is a constant. Assume that the gravitational attraction
    of the earth is constant.
    (a) Find the velocity v(t) of the body at any time.
      (b) Use the result of part (a) to calculate the limit of v(t) as k → 0—that is, as the resis-
      tance approaches zero. Does this result agree with the velocity of a mass m projected
      upward with an initial velocity v0 in a vacuum?
      (c) Use the result of part (a) to calculate the limit of v(t) as m → 0—that is, as the mass
      approaches zero.
27. A body falling in a relatively dense fluid, oil for example, is acted on by three forces
      (see Figure 2.3.5): a resistive force R, a buoyant force B, and its weight w due to gravity.
      The buoyant force is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced by the object. For a slowly
      moving spherical body of radius a, the resistive force is given by Stokes’s law, R = 6πμa|v|,
      where v is the velocity of the body, and μ is the coefficient of viscosity of the surrounding
      fluid.7
      (a) Find the limiting velocity of a solid sphere of radius a and density ρ falling freely in a
      medium of density ρ and coefficient of viscosity μ.
      (b) In 1910 R. A. Millikan8 studied the motion of tiny droplets of oil falling in an electric
      field. A field of strength E exerts a force Ee on a droplet with charge e. Assume that E
      has been adjusted so the droplet is held stationary (v = 0) and that w and B are as given
      above. Find an expression for e. Millikan repeated this experiment many times, and from
      the data that he gathered he was able to deduce the charge on an electron.
                                                   R     B
                                                           a
                                                         w
                           FIGURE 2.3.5 A body falling in a dense fluid.
28. A mass of 0.25 kg is dropped from rest in a medium offering a resistance of 0.2|v|, where
      v is measured in m/s.
      (a) If the mass is dropped from a height of 30 m, find its velocity when it hits the ground.
      (b) If the mass is to attain a velocity of no more than 10 m/s, find the maximum height
      from which it can be dropped.
7 Sir George Gabriel Stokes (1819–1903) was born in Ireland but for most of his life was at Cambridge
University, first as a student and later as a professor. Stokes was one of the foremost applied mathemati-
cians of the nineteenth century, best known for his work in fluid dynamics and the wave theory of light.
The basic equations of fluid mechanics (the Navier–Stokes equations) are named partly in his honor, and
one of the fundamental theorems of vector calculus bears his name. He was also one of the pioneers in
the use of divergent (asymptotic) series.
8 Robert A. Millikan (1868–1953) was educated at Oberlin College and Columbia University. Later he
was a professor at the University of Chicago and California Institute of Technology. His determination of
the charge on an electron was published in 1910. For this work, and for other studies of the photoelectric
effect, he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1923.
    (c) Suppose that the resistive force is k|v|, where v is measured in m/s and k is a constant.
    If the mass is dropped from a height of 30 m and must hit the ground with a velocity of
    no more than 10 m/s, determine the coefficient of resistance k that is required.
29. Suppose that   a rocket is launched straight up from the surface of the earth with initial
    velocity v0 = 2gR, where R is the radius of the earth. Neglect air resistance.
    (a) Find an expression for the velocity v in terms of the distance x from the surface of the
    earth.
    (b) Find the time required for the rocket to go 240,000 mi (the approximate distance from
    the earth to the moon). Assume that R = 4000 mi.
30. Let v(t) and w(t) be the horizontal and vertical components, respectively, of the velocity of
    a batted (or thrown) baseball. In the absence of air resistance, v and w satisfy the equations
                                     dv/dt = 0,       dw/dt = −g.
    (a) Show that
                                 v = u cos A,      w = −gt + u sin A,
    where u is the initial speed of the ball and A is its initial angle of elevation.
    (b) Let x(t) and y(t) be the horizontal and vertical coordinates, respectively, of the ball at
    time t. If x(0) = 0 and y(0) = h, find x(t) and y(t) at any time t.
    (c) Let g = 32 ft/s2 , u = 125 ft/s, and h = 3 ft. Plot the trajectory of the ball for several
    values of the angle A; that is, plot x(t) and y(t) parametrically.
    (d) Suppose the outfield wall is at a distance L and has height H. Find a relation between
    u and A that must be satisfied if the ball is to clear the wall.
    (e) Suppose that L = 350 ft and H = 10 ft. Using the relation in part (d), find (or estimate
    from a plot) the range of values of A that correspond to an initial velocity of u = 110 ft/s.
    (f) For L = 350 and H = 10, find the minimum initial velocity u and the corresponding
    optimal angle A for which the ball will clear the wall.
31. A more realistic model (than that in Problem 30) of a baseball in flight includes the effect
    of air resistance. In this case the equations of motion are
                                 dv/dt = −rv,       dw/dt = −g − rw,
    where r is the coefficient of resistance.
    (a) Determine v(t) and w(t) in terms of initial speed u and initial angle of elevation A.
    (b) Find x(t) and y(t) if x(0) = 0 and y(0) = h.
    (c) Plot the trajectory of the ball for r = 1/5, u = 125, h = 3, and for several values of A.
    How do the trajectories differ from those in Problem 31 with r = 0?
    (d) Assuming that r = 1/5 and h = 3, find the minimum initial velocity u and the optimal
    angle A for which the ball will clear a wall that is 350 ft distant and 10 ft high. Compare
    this result with that in Problem 30(f).
32. Brachistochrone Problem. One of the famous problems in the history of mathematics is
    the brachistochrone9 problem: to find the curve along which a particle will slide without
    friction in the minimum time from one given point P to another Q, the second point being
    lower than the first but not directly beneath it (see Figure 2.3.6). This problem was posed
    by Johann Bernoulli in 1696 as a challenge problem to the mathematicians of his day.
9The word “brachistochrone” comes from the Greek words brachistos, meaning shortest, and chronos,
meaning time.
                    Correct solutions were found by Johann Bernoulli and his brother Jakob Bernoulli and
                    by Isaac Newton, Gottfried Leibniz, and the Marquis de L’Hôpital. The brachistochrone
                    problem is important in the development of mathematics as one of the forerunners of the
                    calculus of variations.
                        In solving this problem, it is convenient to take the origin as the upper point P and to
                    orient the axes as shown in Figure 2.3.6. The lower point Q has coordinates (x0 , y0 ). It is
                    then possible to show that the curve of minimum time is given by a function y = φ(x) that
                    satisfies the differential equation
                                                                (1 + y 2 )y = k2 ,                                (i)
                    where k2 is a certain positive constant to be determined later.
                    (a) Solve Eq. (i) for y . Why is it necessary to choose the positive square root?
                    (b) Introduce the new variable t by the relation
                                                                  y = k2 sin2 t.                                  (ii)
                    Show that the equation found in part (a) then takes the form
                                                              2k2 sin2 t dt = dx.                                (iii)
                    (c) Letting θ = 2t, show that the solution of Eq. (iii) for which x = 0 when y = 0 is given by
                                                x = k2 (θ − sin θ)/2,        y = k2 (1 − cos θ)/2.               (iv)
                    Equations (iv) are parametric equations of the solution of Eq. (i) that passes through
                    (0, 0). The graph of Eqs. (iv) is called a cycloid.
                    (d) If we make a proper choice of the constant k, then the cycloid also passes through the
                    point (x0 , y0 ) and is the solution of the brachistochrone problem. Find k if x0 = 1 and y0 = 2.
                                                    P                                     x
                                                                              Q(x 0, y0)
                                                  y
                                                 FIGURE 2.3.6 The brachistochrone.
2.4 Differences Between Linear and Nonlinear Equations
                Up to now, we have been primarily concerned with showing that first order differ-
                ential equations can be used to investigate many different kinds of problems in the
                natural sciences, and with presenting methods of solving such equations if they are
                either linear or separable. Now it is time to turn our attention to some more general
              questions about differential equations and to explore in more detail some important
              ways in which nonlinear equations differ from linear ones.
              Existence and Uniqueness of Solutions. So far, we have discussed a number of initial value
              problems, each of which had a solution and apparently only one solution. That raises
              the question of whether this is true of all initial value problems for first order equa-
              tions. In other words, does every initial value problem have exactly one solution?
              This may be an important question even for nonmathematicians. If you encounter
              an initial value problem in the course of investigating some physical problem, you
              might want to know that it has a solution before spending very much time and effort
              in trying to find it. Further, if you are successful in finding one solution, you might
              be interested in knowing whether you should continue a search for other possible
              solutions or whether you can be sure that there are no other solutions. For linear
              equations, the answers to these questions are given by the following fundamental
              theorem.
Theorem 2.4.1 If the functions p and g are continuous on an open interval I: α < t < β contain-
              ing the point t = t0 , then there exists a unique function y = φ(t) that satisfies the
              differential equation
                                                    y + p(t)y = g(t)                                (1)
              for each t in I, and that also satisfies the initial condition
                                                       y(t0 ) = y0 ,                                 (2)
              where y0 is an arbitrary prescribed initial value.
                 Observe thatTheorem 2.4.1 states that the given initial value problem has a solution
              and also that the problem has only one solution. In other words, the theorem asserts
              both the existence and the uniqueness of the solution of the initial value problem (1),
              (2). In addition, it states that the solution exists throughout any interval I containing
              the initial point t0 in which the coefficients p and g are continuous. That is, the solution
              can be discontinuous or fail to exist only at points where at least one of p and g is
              discontinuous. Such points can often be identified at a glance.
                 The proof of this theorem is partly contained in the discussion in Section 2.1 leading
              to the formula [Eq. (32) in Section 2.1]
                                                         
                                               μ(t)y = μ(t)g(t) dt + c,                               (3)
              where [Eq. (30) in Section 2.1]
                                                               
                                                  μ(t) = exp      p(t) dt.                            (4)
              The derivation in Section 2.1 shows that if Eq. (1) has a solution, then it must be
              given by Eq. (3). By looking slightly more closely at that derivation, we can also
              conclude that the differential equation (1) must indeed have a solution. Since p is
              continuous for α < t < β, it follows that μ is defined in this interval and is a nonzero
              differentiable function. Upon multiplying Eq. (1) by μ(t), we obtain
                                                  [μ(t)y] = μ(t)g(t).                                 (5)
              Since both μ and g are continuous, the function μg is integrable, and Eq. (3) follows
              from Eq. (5). Further, the integral of μg is differentiable, so y as given by Eq. (3)
              exists and is differentiable throughout the interval α < t < β. By substituting the
              expression for y from Eq. (3) into either Eq. (1) or Eq. (5), you can verify that
              this expression satisfies the differential equation throughout the interval α < t < β.
              Finally, the initial condition (2) determines the constant c uniquely, so there is only
              one solution of the initial value problem; this completes the proof.
                 Equation (4) determines the integrating factor μ(t) only up to a multiplicative
              factor that depends on the lower limit of integration. If we choose this lower limit to
              be t0 , then
                                                               t
                                                 μ(t) = exp       p(s) ds,                             (6)
                                                               t0
              and it follows that μ(t0 ) = 1. Using the integrating factor given by Eq. (6), and choos-
              ing the lower limit of integration in Eq. (3) also to be t0 , we obtain the general solution
              of Eq. (1) in the form
                                                       t                    
                                                  1
                                            y=              μ(s)g(s) ds + c .                          (7)
                                                 μ(t) t0
              To satisfy the initial condition (2), we must choose c = y0 . Thus the solution of the
              initial value problem (1), (2) is
                                                       t                    
                                                  1
                                            y=              μ(s)g(s) ds + y0 ,                         (8)
                                                μ(t) t0
              where μ(t) is given by Eq. (6).
                 Turning now to nonlinear differential equations, we must replace Theorem 2.4.1
              by a more general theorem, such as the one that follows.
Theorem 2.4.2 Let the functions f and ∂f /∂y be continuous in some rectangle α < t < β,
              γ < y < δ containing the point (t0 , y0 ). Then, in some interval t0 − h < t < t0 + h
              contained in α < t < β, there is a unique solution y = φ(t) of the initial value
              problem
                                             y = f (t, y),     y(t0 ) = y0 .                         (9)
                 Observe that the hypotheses in Theorem 2.4.2 reduce to those in Theorem 2.4.1 if
              the differential equation is linear. In this case
                                 f (t, y) = −p(t)y + g(t)    and    ∂f (t, y)/∂y = −p(t),
              so the continuity of f and ∂f /∂y is equivalent to the continuity of p and g.
                 The proof of Theorem 2.4.1 was comparatively simple because it could be based
              on the expression (3) that gives the solution of an arbitrary linear equation. There
              is no corresponding expression for the solution of the differential equation (9), so
        the proof of Theorem 2.4.2 is much more difficult. It is discussed to some extent in
        Section 2.8 and in greater depth in more advanced books on differential equations.
           Here we note that the conditions stated in Theorem 2.4.2 are sufficient to guarantee
        the existence of a unique solution of the initial value problem (9) in some interval
        t0 − h < t < t0 + h, but they are not necessary. That is, the conclusion remains true
        under slightly weaker hypotheses about the function f . In fact, the existence of a
        solution (but not its uniqueness) can be established on the basis of the continuity of
        f alone.
           An important geometrical consequence of the uniqueness parts of Theorems 2.4.1
        and 2.4.2 is that the graphs of two solutions cannot intersect each other. Otherwise,
        there would be two solutions that satisfy the initial condition corresponding to the
        point of intersection, in contradiction to Theorem 2.4.1 or 2.4.2.
           We now consider some examples.
        Use Theorem 2.4.1 to find an interval in which the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                                   ty + 2y = 4t 2 ,                                       (10)
   1                                                    y(1) = 2                                           (11)
        has a unique solution.
           Rewriting Eq. (10) in the standard form (1), we have
                                                  y + (2/t)y = 4t,
        so p(t) = 2/t and g(t) = 4t. Thus, for this equation, g is continuous for all t, while p is continuous
        only for t < 0 or for t > 0. The interval t > 0 contains the initial point; consequently, Theorem
        2.4.1 guarantees that the problem (10), (11) has a unique solution on the interval 0 < t < ∞.
        In Example 4 of Section 2.1 we found the solution of this initial value problem to be
                                                          1
                                              y = t2 + 2 ,        t > 0.                                   (12)
                                                          t
           Now suppose that the initial condition (11) is changed to y(−1) = 2. Then Theorem 2.4.1
        asserts the existence of a unique solution for t < 0. As you can readily verify, the solution is
        again given by Eq. (12), but now on the interval −∞ < t < 0.
        Apply Theorem 2.4.2 to the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                       dy     3x2 + 4x + 2
   2                                   dx
                                           =
                                                 2(y − 1)
                                                             ,       y(0) = −1.                            (13)
           Note that Theorem 2.4.1 is not applicable to this problem since the differential equation is
        nonlinear. To apply Theorem 2.4.2, observe that
                                       3x2 + 4x + 2          ∂f            3x2 + 4x + 2
                            f (x, y) =                ,         (x, y) = −                .
                                         2(y − 1)            ∂y              2(y − 1)2
        Thus each of these functions is continuous everywhere except on the line y = 1. Consequently,a
        rectangle can be drawn about the initial point (0, −1) in which both f and ∂f /∂y are continuous.
        Therefore, Theorem 2.4.2 guarantees that the initial value problem has a unique solution in
        some interval about x = 0. However, even though the rectangle can be stretched infinitely
        far in both the positive and the negative x directions, this does not necessarily mean that the
        solution exists for all x. Indeed, the initial value problem (13) was solved in Example 2 of
        Section 2.2, and the solution exists only for x > −2.
           Now suppose we change the initial condition to y(0) = 1. The initial point now lies on the
        line y = 1, so no rectangle can be drawn about it within which f and ∂f /∂y are continuous.
        Consequently, Theorem 2.4.2 says nothing about possible solutions of this modified problem.
        However, if we separate the variables and integrate, as in Section 2.2, we find that
                                            y2 − 2y = x3 + 2x2 + 2x + c.
        Further, if x = 0 and y = 1, then c = −1. Finally, by solving for y, we obtain
                                                        
                                              y = 1 ± x3 + 2x2 + 2x.                                     (14)
        Equation (14) provides two functions that satisfy the given differential equation for x > 0 and
        also satisfy the initial condition y(0) = 1.
        Consider the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                               y = y1/3 ,         y(0) = 0                              (15)
   3
        for t ≥ 0. Apply Theorem 2.4.2 to this initial value problem and then solve the problem.
           The function f (t, y) = y1/3 is continuous everywhere, but ∂f /∂y does not exist when y = 0,
        and hence it is not continuous there. Thus Theorem 2.4.2 does not apply to this problem, and
        no conclusion can be drawn from it. However, by the remark following Theorem 2.4.2, the
        continuity of f does ensure the existence of solutions, though not their uniqueness.
           To understand the situation more clearly, we must actually solve the problem, which is easy
        to do since the differential equation is separable. Thus we have
                                                     y−1/3 dy = dt,
        so
                                                       y =t+c
                                                     3 2/3
                                                     2
        and
                                                       2            3/2
                                                  y=    3
                                                           (t + c)        .
        The initial condition is satisfied if c = 0, so
                                                          2 3/2
                                           y = φ1 (t) =     3
                                                              t      ,       t≥0                         (16)
        satisfies both of Eqs. (15). On the other hand, the function
                                                             2 3/2
                                          y = φ2 (t) = −      3
                                                                t      ,      t≥0                        (17)
        is also a solution of the initial value problem. Moreover, the function
                                               y = ψ(t) = 0,             t≥0                             (18)
        is yet another solution. Indeed, for an arbitrary positive t0 , the functions
                                               
                                                 0,                        if 0 ≤ t < t0 ,
                                   y = χ(t) =       2            3/2                                   (19)
                                                 ± 3 (t − t0 )         , if t ≥ t0
        are continuous, are differentiable (in particular at t = t0 ), and are solutions of the initial value
        problem (15). Hence this problem has an infinite family of solutions; see Figure 2.4.1, where a
        few of these solutions are shown.
           As already noted,the nonuniqueness of the solutions of the problem (15) does not contradict
        the existence and uniqueness theorem, since the theorem is not applicable if the initial point
        lies on the t-axis. If (t0 , y0 ) is any point not on the t-axis, however, then the theorem guarantees
        that there is a unique solution of the differential equation y = y1/3 passing through (t0 , y0 ).
                              y
                                                                                              χ (t)
                              1
                                                   φ1(t)
                                                                                         ψ (t)
                                                         1                  2                       t
                            –1                        φ 2(t)                                χ (t)
              FIGURE 2.4.1           Several solutions of the initial value problem y = y1/3, y(0) = 0.
        Interval of Definition. According to Theorem 2.4.1, the solution of a linear equation (1)
                                                      y + p(t)y = g(t),
        subject to the initial condition y(t0 ) = y0 , exists throughout any interval about t = t0
        in which the functions p and g are continuous. Thus vertical asymptotes or other
        discontinuities in the solution can occur only at points of discontinuity of p or g.
        For instance, the solutions in Example 1 (with one exception) are asymptotic to the
        y-axis, corresponding to the discontinuity at t = 0 in the coefficient p(t) = 2/t, but
        none of the solutions has any other point where it fails to exist and to be differentiable.
        The one exceptional solution shows that solutions may sometimes remain continuous
        even at points of discontinuity of the coefficients.
           On the other hand, for a nonlinear initial value problem satisfying the hypotheses
        of Theorem 2.4.2, the interval in which a solution exists may be difficult to determine.
        The solution y = φ(t) is certain to exist as long as the point [t, φ(t)] remains within a
        region in which the hypotheses of Theorem 2.4.2 are satisfied. This is what determines
        the value of h in that theorem. However, since φ(t) is usually not known, it may be
        impossible to locate the point [t, φ(t)] with respect to this region. In any case, the
        interval in which a solution exists may have no simple relationship to the function f
        in the differential equation y = f (t, y). This is illustrated by the following example.
        Solve the initial value problem
EXAMPLE                                             y = y2 ,     y(0) = 1,                               (20)
   4    and determine the interval in which the solution exists.
           Theorem 2.4.2 guarantees that this problem has a unique solution since f (t, y) = y2 and
        ∂f /∂y = 2y are continuous everywhere. To find the solution, we separate the variables and
        integrate with the result that
                                                           y−2 dy = dt                                    (21)
and
                                           −y−1 = t + c.
Then, solving for y, we have
                                                     1
                                            y=−           .                                  (22)
                                                   t+c
To satisfy the initial condition, we must choose c = −1, so
                                                    1
                                             y=                                              (23)
                                                  1−t
is the solution of the given initial value problem. Clearly, the solution becomes unbounded as
t → 1; therefore, the solution exists only in the interval −∞ < t < 1. There is no indication
from the differential equation itself, however, that the point t = 1 is in any way remarkable.
Moreover, if the initial condition is replaced by
                                             y(0) = y0 ,                                     (24)
then the constant c in Eq. (22) must be chosen to be c = −1/y0 , and it follows that
                                                    y0
                                            y=                                               (25)
                                                 1 − y0 t
is the solution of the initial value problem with the initial condition (24). Observe that the
solution (25) becomes unbounded as t → 1/y0 , so the interval of existence of the solution
is −∞ < t < 1/y0 if y0 > 0, and is 1/y0 < t < ∞ if y0 < 0. This example illustrates another
feature of initial value problems for nonlinear equations: the singularities of the solution may
depend in an essential way on the initial conditions as well as on the differential equation.
General Solution. Another way in which linear and nonlinear equations differ concerns
the concept of a general solution. For a first order linear equation it is possible to
obtain a solution containing one arbitrary constant, from which all possible solutions
follow by specifying values for this constant. For nonlinear equations this may not be
the case; even though a solution containing an arbitrary constant may be found, there
may be other solutions that cannot be obtained by giving values to this constant. For
instance, for the differential equation y = y2 in Example 4, the expression in Eq. (22)
contains an arbitrary constant but does not include all solutions of the differential
equation. To show this, observe that the function y = 0 for all t is certainly a solution of
the differential equation, but it cannot be obtained from Eq. (22) by assigning a value
to c. In this example we might anticipate that something of this sort might happen,
because to rewrite the original differential equation in the form (21), we must require
that y is not zero. However, the existence of “additional” solutions is not uncommon
for nonlinear equations; a less obvious example is given in Problem 22. Thus we will
use the term “general solution” only when discussing linear equations.
Implicit Solutions. Recall again that for an initial value problem for a first order linear
equation, Eq. (8) provides an explicit formula for the solution y = φ(t). As long as
the necessary antiderivatives can be found, the value of the solution at any point can
be determined merely by substituting the appropriate value of t into the equation.
The situation for nonlinear equations is much less satisfactory. Usually, the best that
we can hope for is to find an equation
                                            F(t, y) = 0                                     (26)
involving t and y that is satisfied by the solution y = φ(t). Even this can be done
only for differential equations of certain particular types, of which separable equa-
tions are the most important. The equation (26) is called an integral, or first integral,
of the differential equation, and (as we have already noted) its graph is an inte-
gral curve, or perhaps a family of integral curves. Equation (26), assuming it can
be found, defines the solution implicitly; that is, for each value of t we must solve
Eq. (26) to find the corresponding value of y. If Eq. (26) is simple enough, it may
be possible to solve it for y by analytical means and thereby obtain an explicit
formula for the solution. However, more frequently this will not be possible, and
you will have to resort to a numerical calculation to determine (approximately) the
value of y for a given value of t. Once several pairs of values of t and y have been
calculated, it is often helpful to plot them and then to sketch the integral curve
that passes through them. You should arrange for a computer to do this for you, if
possible.
   Examples 2, 3, and 4 are nonlinear problems in which it is easy to solve for an
explicit formula for the solution y = φ(t). On the other hand, Examples 1 and 3
in Section 2.2 are cases in which it is better to leave the solution in implicit form
and to use numerical means to evaluate it for particular values of the indepen-
dent variable. The latter situation is more typical; unless the implicit relation is
quadratic in y or has some other particularly simple form, it is unlikely that it can
be solved exactly by analytical methods. Indeed, more often than not, it is impos-
sible even to find an implicit expression for the solution of a first order nonlinear
equation.
Graphical or Numerical Construction of Integral Curves. Because of the difficulty in obtain-
ing exact analytical solutions of nonlinear differential equations, methods that yield
approximate solutions or other qualitative information about solutions are of corre-
spondingly greater importance. We have already described, in Section 1.1, how the
direction field of a differential equation can be constructed. The direction field can
often show the qualitative form of solutions and can also be helpful in identifying
regions of the ty-plane where solutions exhibit interesting features that merit more
detailed analytical or numerical investigation. Graphical methods for first order equa-
tions are discussed further in Section 2.5. An introduction to numerical methods for
first order equations is given in Section 2.7, and a systematic discussion of numerical
methods appears in Chapter 8. However, it is not necessary to study the numerical
algorithms themselves in order to use effectively one of the many software pack-
ages that generate and plot numerical approximations to solutions of initial value
problems.
Summary. The linear equation y + p(t)y = g(t) has several nice properties that can
be summarized in the following statements:
1. Assuming that the coefficients are continuous, there is a general solution, containing an
    arbitrary constant, that includes all solutions of the differential equation. A particular
    solution that satisfies a given initial condition can be picked out by choosing the proper
    value for the arbitrary constant.
2. There is an expression for the solution, namely, Eq. (7) or Eq. (8). Moreover, although it
    involves two integrations, the expression is an explicit one for the solution y = φ(t) rather
    than an equation that defines φ implicitly.
         3. The possible points of discontinuity, or singularities, of the solution can be identified
              (without solving the problem) merely by finding the points of discontinuity of the coeffi-
              cients. Thus, if the coefficients are continuous for all t, then the solution also exists and is
              differentiable for all t.
         None of these statements is true, in general, of nonlinear equations. Although a
         nonlinear equation may well have a solution involving an arbitrary constant, there
         may also be other solutions. There is no general formula for solutions of nonlinear
         equations. If you are able to integrate a nonlinear equation, you are likely to obtain an
         equation defining solutions implicitly rather than explicitly. Finally, the singularities
         of solutions of nonlinear equations can usually be found only by solving the equation
         and examining the solution. It is likely that the singularities will depend on the initial
         condition as well as on the differential equation.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, determine (without solving the problem) an interval in which
         the solution of the given initial value problem is certain to exist.
          1. (t − 3)y + (ln t)y = 2t,        y(1) = 2
          2. t(t − 4)y + y = 0,         y(2) = 1
          3. y + (tan t)y = sin t,        y(π) = 0          4. (4 − t 2 )y + 2ty = 3t 2 ,      y(−3) = 1
          5. (4 − t 2 )y + 2ty = 3t 2 ,     y(1) = −3       6. (ln t)y + y = cot t,         y(2) = 3
         In each of Problems 7 through 12, state where in the ty-plane the hypotheses of Theorem 2.4.2
         are satisfied.
                      t−y
          7. y =                                            8. y = (1 − t 2 − y2 )1/2
                    2t + 5y
                       ln |ty|
          9. y =                                          10. y = (t 2 + y2 )3/2
                    1 − t 2 + y2
              dy       1 + t2                                   dy       (cot t)y
         11.      =                                        12.       =
               dt     3y − y2                                    dt       1+y
         In each of Problems 13 through 16, solve the given initial value problem and determine how
         the interval in which the solution exists depends on the initial value y0 .
         13. y = −4t/y,         y(0) = y0                 14. y = 2ty2 ,        y(0) = y0
                                                                 
         15. y + y = 0,
                     3
                                 y(0) = y0                 16. y = t /y(1 + t 3 ),
                                                                       2
                                                                                            y(0) = y0
         In each of Problems 17 through 20, draw a direction field and plot (or sketch) several solutions
         of the given differential equation. Describe how solutions appear to behave as t increases and
         how their behavior depends on the initial value y0 when t = 0.
         17. y = ty(3 − y)                                18. y = y(3 − ty)
                
         19. y = −y(3 − ty)                                20. y = t − 1 − y2
                                                       
         21. Consider the initial value problem y = y , y(0) = 0 from Example 3 in the text.
                                                         1/3
              (a) Is there a solution that passes through the point (1, 1)? If so, find it.
              (b) Is there a solution that passes through the point (2, 1)? If so, find it.
              (c) Consider all possible solutions of the given initial value problem. Determine the set
              of values that these solutions have at t = 2.
22. (a) Verify that both y1 (t) = 1 − t and y2 (t) = −t 2 /4 are solutions of the initial value
    problem
                                             
                                      −t + t 2 + 4y
                                  y =                  ,      y(2) = −1.
                                               2
    Where are these solutions valid?
    (b) Explain why the existence of two solutions of the given problem does not contradict
    the uniqueness part of Theorem 2.4.2.
    (c) Show that y = ct + c2 , where c is an arbitrary constant, satisfies the differential
    equation in part (a) for t ≥ −2c. If c = −1, the initial condition is also satisfied, and
    the solution y = y1 (t) is obtained. Show that there is no choice of c that gives the second
    solution y = y2 (t).
23. (a) Show that φ(t) = e2t is a solution of y − 2y = 0 and that y = cφ(t) is also a solution
    of this equation for any value of the constant c.
    (b) Show that φ(t) = 1/t is a solution of y + y2 = 0 for t > 0 but that y = cφ(t) is not
    a solution of this equation unless c = 0 or c = 1. Note that the equation of part (b) is
    nonlinear, while that of part (a) is linear.
24. Show that if y = φ(t) is a solution of y + p(t)y = 0, then y = cφ(t) is also a solution for
    any value of the constant c.
25. Let y = y1 (t) be a solution of
                                             y + p(t)y = 0,                                   (i)
    and let y = y2 (t) be a solution of
                                            y + p(t)y = g(t).                                (ii)
    Show that y = y1 (t) + y2 (t) is also a solution of Eq. (ii).
26. (a) Show that the solution (7) of the general linear equation (1) can be written in the
    form
                                           y = cy1 (t) + y2 (t),                               (i)
    where c is an arbitrary constant.
    (b) Show that y1 is a solution of the differential equation
                                             y + p(t)y = 0,                                  (ii)
    corresponding to g(t) = 0.
    (c) Show that y2 is a solution of the full linear equation (1). We see later (for example,
    in Section 3.5) that solutions of higher order linear equations have a pattern similar to
    Eq. (i).
Bernoulli Equations. Sometimes it is possible to solve a nonlinear equation by making a
change of the dependent variable that converts it into a linear equation. The most important
such equation has the form
                                        y + p(t)y = q(t)yn ,
and is called a Bernoulli equation after Jakob Bernoulli. Problems 27 through 31 deal with
equations of this type.
27. (a) Solve Bernoulli’s equation when n = 0; when n = 1.
    (b) Show that if n  = 0, 1, then the substitution v = y1−n reduces Bernoulli’s equation to a
    linear equation. This method of solution was found by Leibniz in 1696.
             In each of Problems 28 through 31, the given equation is a Bernoulli equation. In each case
             solve it by using the substitution mentioned in Problem 27(b).
             28. t 2 y + 2ty − y3 = 0,    t>0
                    
             29. y = ry − ky , r > 0 and k > 0. This equation is important in population dynamics and is
                                2
                 discussed in detail in Section 2.5.
             30. y = y − σy3 ,  > 0 and σ > 0. This equation occurs in the study of the stability of fluid
                 flow.
             31. dy/dt = ( cos t + T)y − y3 , where  and T are constants. This equation also occurs in the
                 study of the stability of fluid flow.
             Discontinuous Coefficients. Linear differential equations sometimes occur in which one or
             both of the functions p and g have jump discontinuities. If t0 is such a point of discontinuity,
             then it is necessary to solve the equation separately for t < t0 and t > t0 . Afterward, the two
             solutions are matched so that y is continuous at t0 ; this is accomplished by a proper choice of
             the arbitrary constants. The following two problems illustrate this situation. Note in each case
             that it is impossible also to make y continuous at t0 .
             32. Solve the initial value problem
                                                 y + 2y = g(t),       y(0) = 0,
                 where
                                                           
                                                            1,   0 ≤ t ≤ 1,
                                                    g(t) =
                                                             0,       t > 1.
             33. Solve the initial value problem
                                                 y + p(t)y = 0,       y(0) = 1,
                 where
                                                           
                                                             2,  0 ≤ t ≤ 1,
                                                    p(t) =
                                                             1,       t > 1.
2.5 Autonomous Equations and Population Dynamics
             An important class of first order equations consists of those in which the independent
             variable does not appear explicitly. Such equations are called autonomous and have
             the form
                                                       dy/dt = f (y).                                      (1)
             We will discuss these equations in the context of the growth or decline of the popula-
             tion of a given species, an important issue in fields ranging from medicine to ecology
             to global economics. A number of other applications are mentioned in some of the
             problems. Recall that in Sections 1.1 and 1.2 we considered the special case of Eq. (1)
             in which f (y) = ay + b.
                Equation (1) is separable, so the discussion in Section 2.2 is applicable to it, but the
             main purpose of this section is to show how geometrical methods can be used to obtain
             important qualitative information directly from the differential equation without
solving the equation. Of fundamental importance in this effort are the concepts
of stability and instability of solutions of differential equations. These ideas were
introduced informally in Chapter 1, but without using this terminology. They are
discussed further here and will be examined in greater depth and in a more general
setting in Chapter 9.
Exponential Growth. Let y = φ(t) be the population of the given species at time t. The
simplest hypothesis concerning the variation of population is that the rate of change
of y is proportional10 to the current value of y; that is,
                                             dy/dt = ry,                                            (2)
where the constant of proportionality r is called the rate of growth or decline, depend-
ing on whether it is positive or negative. Here, we assume that r > 0, so the population
is growing.
    Solving Eq. (2) subject to the initial condition
                                              y(0) = y0 ,                                           (3)
we obtain
                                              y = y0 ert .                                          (4)
Thus the mathematical model consisting of the initial value problem (2), (3) with
r > 0 predicts that the population will grow exponentially for all time, as shown in
Figure 2.5.1 for several values of y0 . Under ideal conditions, Eq. (4) has been observed
to be reasonably accurate for many populations, at least for limited periods of time.
However, it is clear that such ideal conditions cannot continue indefinitely; eventually,
limitations on space, food supply, or other resources will reduce the growth rate and
bring an end to uninhibited exponential growth.
                           y
                         10
                           8
                           6
                           4
                           2
                                       1/r         2/r        3/r         4/r t
             FIGURE 2.5.1       Exponential growth: y versus t for dy/dt = ry (r > 0).
10 It was apparently the British economist Thomas Malthus (1766–1834) who first observed that many
biological populations increase at a rate proportional to the population. His first paper on populations
appeared in 1798.
Logistic Growth. To take account of the fact that the growth rate actually depends on
the population, we replace the constant r in Eq. (2) by a function h(y) and thereby
obtain the modified equation
                                          dy/dt = h(y)y.                                                (5)
    We now want to choose h(y) so that h(y) ∼          = r > 0 when y is small, h(y) decreases
as y grows larger, and h(y) < 0 when y is sufficiently large. The simplest function that
has these properties is h(y) = r − ay, where a is also a positive constant. Using this
function in Eq. (5), we obtain
                                        dy/dt = (r − ay)y.                                              (6)
Equation (6) is known as the Verhulst11 equation or the logistic equation. It is often
convenient to write the logistic equation in the equivalent form
                                        dy               y
                                            =r 1−              y,                                       (7)
                                         dt              K
where K = r/a. The constant r is called the intrinsic growth rate—that is, the growth
rate in the absence of any limiting factors. The interpretation of K will become clear
shortly.
    We will investigate the solutions of Eq. (7) in some detail later in this section.
Before doing that, however, we will show how you can easily draw a qualitatively
correct sketch of the solutions. The same methods also apply to the more general
Eq. (1).
    We first seek solutions of Eq. (7) of the simplest possible type—that is, constant
functions. For such a solution dy/dt = 0 for all t, so any constant solution of Eq. (7)
must satisfy the algebraic equation
                                         r(1 − y/K)y = 0.
Thus the constant solutions are y = φ1 (t) = 0 and y = φ2 (t) = K. These solutions
are called equilibrium solutions of Eq. (7) because they correspond to no change
or variation in the value of y as t increases. In the same way, any equilibrium solu-
tions of the more general Eq. (1) can be found by locating the roots of f (y) = 0.
The zeros of f (y) are also called critical points.
    To visualize other solutions of Eq. (7) and to sketch their graphs quickly, we start
by drawing the graph of f (y) versus y. In the case of Eq. (7), f (y) = r(1 − y/K)y,
so the graph is the parabola shown in Figure 2.5.2. The intercepts are (0, 0) and
(K, 0), corresponding to the critical points of Eq. (7), and the vertex of the parabola
is (K/2, rK/4). Observe that dy/dt > 0 for 0 < y < K; therefore, y is an increasing
function of t when y is in this interval; this is indicated by the rightward-pointing
11 Pierre F. Verhulst (1804–1849) was a Belgian mathematician who introduced Eq. (6) as a model for
human population growth in 1838. He referred to it as logistic growth so Eq. (6) is often called the logistic
equation. He was unable to test the accuracy of his model because of inadequate census data, and it did
not receive much attention until many years later. Reasonable agreement with experimental data was
demonstrated by R. Pearl (1930) for Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) populations and by G. F. Gause
(1935) for Paramecium and Tribolium (flour beetle) populations.
                          f ( y)
                                       (K/2, rK /4)
                         rK /4
                                          K/2            K             y
                  FIGURE 2.5.2     f (y) versus y for dy/dt = r(1 − y/K)y.
arrows near the y-axis in Figure 2.5.2. Similarly, if y > K, then dy/dt < 0; hence y is
decreasing, as indicated by the leftward-pointing arrow in Figure 2.5.2.
   In this context the y-axis is often called the phase line, and it is reproduced in its
more customary vertical orientation in Figure 2.5.3a. The dots at y = 0 and y = K
are the critical points, or equilibrium solutions. The arrows again indicate that y is
increasing whenever 0 < y < K and that y is decreasing whenever y > K.
   Further, from Figure 2.5.2, note that if y is near zero or K, then the slope f (y) is
near zero, so the solution curves are relatively flat. They become steeper as the value
of y leaves the neighborhood of zero or K.
   To sketch the graphs of solutions of Eq. (7) in the ty-plane, we start with the equi-
librium solutions y = 0 and y = K; then we draw other curves that are increasing
when 0 < y < K, decreasing when y > K, and flatten out as y approaches either of
the values 0 or K. Thus the graphs of solutions of Eq. (7) must have the general shape
shown in Figure 2.5.3b, regardless of the values of r and K.
        y             y
                                                                  φ 2(t) = K
       K              K
                    K/2
                                                    φ 1(t) = 0
       0
                                                                                 t
         (a)                                          (b)
                  FIGURE 2.5.3 Logistic growth: dy/dt = r(1 − y/K)y.
                         (a) The phase line. (b) Plots of y versus t.
   Figure 2.5.3b may seem to show that other solutions intersect the equilibrium
solution y = K, but is this really possible? No, the uniqueness part of Theorem 2.4.2,
the fundamental existence and uniqueness theorem, states that only one solution
can pass through a given point in the ty-plane. Thus, although other solutions may
be asymptotic to the equilibrium solution as t → ∞, they cannot intersect it at any
finite time. Consequently, a solution that starts in the interval 0 < y < K remains in
this interval for all time, and similarly for a solution that starts in K < y < ∞.
   To carry the investigation one step further, we can determine the concavity of the
solution curves and the location of inflection points by finding d2 y/dt 2 . From
the differential equation (1), we obtain (using the chain rule)
                      d2 y    d dy       d              dy
                          2
                            =         = f (y) = f  (y)     = f  (y)f (y).            (8)
                       dt     dt dt      dt             dt
The graph of y versus t is concave up when y > 0—that is, when f and f  have the
same sign. Similarly, it is concave down when y < 0, which occurs when f and f  have
opposite signs. The signs of f and f  can be easily identified from the graph of f (y)
versus y. Inflection points may occur when f  (y) = 0.
   In the case of Eq. (7), solutions are concave up for 0 < y < K/2 where f is pos-
itive and increasing (see Figure 2.5.2), so that both f and f  are positive. Solutions
are also concave up for y > K where f is negative and decreasing (both f and f  are
negative). For K/2 < y < K, solutions are concave down since here f is positive and
decreasing, so f is positive but f  is negative. There is an inflection point whenever the
graph of y versus t crosses the line y = K/2. The graphs in Figure 2.5.3b exhibit these
properties.
   Finally, observe that K is the upper bound that is approached, but not exceeded,
by growing populations starting below this value. Thus it is natural to refer to
K as the saturation level, or the environmental carrying capacity, for the given
species.
   A comparison of Figures 2.5.1 and 2.5.3b reveals that solutions of the nonlinear
equation (7) are strikingly different from those of the linear equation (1), at least
for large values of t. Regardless of the value of K—that is, no matter how small
the nonlinear term in Eq. (7)—solutions of that equation approach a finite value as
t → ∞, whereas solutions of Eq. (1) grow (exponentially) without bound as t → ∞.
Thus even a tiny nonlinear term in the differential equation (7) has a decisive effect
on the solution for large t.
   In many situations it is sufficient to have the qualitative information about a solu-
tion y = φ(t) of Eq. (7) that is shown in Figure 2.5.3b. This information was obtained
entirely from the graph of f (y) versus y and without solving the differential equation
(7). However, if we wish to have a more detailed description of logistic growth—for
example, if we wish to know the value of the population at some particular time—
then we must solve Eq. (7) subject to the initial condition (3). Provided that y = 0
and y  = K, we can write Eq. (7) in the form
                                           dy
                                                   = r dt.
                                      (1 − y/K)y
Using a partial fraction expansion on the left side, we have
                               
                                 1      1/K
                                   +              dy = r dt.
                                 y 1 − y/K
Then, by integrating both sides, we obtain
                                               y 
                                          
                              ln |y| − ln 1 −  = rt + c,                           (9)
                                               K
where c is an arbitrary constant of integration to be determined from the initial
condition y(0) = y0 . We have already noted that if 0 < y0 < K, then y remains in
this interval for all time. Thus in this case we can remove the absolute value bars
in Eq. (9), and by taking the exponential of both sides, we find that
                                         y
                                                = Cert ,                            (10)
                                    1 − (y/K)
where C = ec . In order to satisfy the initial condition y(0) = y0 , we must choose
C = y0 /[1 − (y0 /K)]. Using this value for C in Eq. (10) and solving for y, we obtain
                                             y0 K
                                 y=                      .                          (11)
                                      y0 + (K − y0 )e−rt
   We have derived the solution (11) under the assumption that 0 < y0 < K. If
y0 > K, then the details of dealing with Eq. (9) are only slightly different, and we
leave it to you to show that Eq. (11) is also valid in this case. Finally, note that
Eq. (11) also contains the equilibrium solutions y = φ1 (t) = 0 and y = φ2 (t) = K
corresponding to the initial conditions y0 = 0 and y0 = K, respectively.
   All the qualitative conclusions that we reached earlier by geometrical reason-
ing can be confirmed by examining the solution (11). In particular, if y0 = 0, then
Eq. (11) requires that y(t) = 0 for all t. If y0 > 0, and if we let t → ∞ in Eq. (11),
then we obtain
                                 lim y(t) = y0 K/y0 = K.
                                t→∞
Thus, for each y0 > 0, the solution approaches the equilibrium solution y = φ2 (t) = K
asymptotically as t → ∞. Therefore, we say that the constant solution φ2 (t) = K is
an asymptotically stable solution of Eq. (7) or that the point y = K is an asymp-
totically stable equilibrium or critical point. After a long time, the population is
close to the saturation level K regardless of the initial population size, as long as
it is positive. Other solutions approach the equilibrium solution more rapidly as r
increases.
   On the other hand, the situation for the equilibrium solution y = φ1 (t) = 0 is quite
different. Even solutions that start very near zero grow as t increases and, as we have
seen, approach K as t → ∞. We say that φ1 (t) = 0 is an unstable equilibrium solution
or that y = 0 is an unstable equilibrium or critical point. This means that the only
way to guarantee that the solution remains near zero is to make sure its initial value
is exactly equal to zero.
        The logistic model has been applied to the natural growth of the halibut population in certain
EXAMPLE areas of the Pacific Ocean.12 Let y, measured in kilograms, be the total mass, or biomass,
   1    of the halibut population at time t. The parameters in the logistic equation are estimated to
        have the values r = 0.71/year and K = 80.5 × 106 kg. If the initial biomass is y0 = 0.25K, find
        the biomass 2 years later. Also find the time τ for which y(τ) = 0.75K.
           It is convenient to scale the solution (11) to the carrying capacity K; thus we write Eq. (11)
        in the form
                                           y                  y0 /K
                                              =                                 .                          (12)
                                           K     (y0 /K) + [1 − (y0 /K)]e−rt
        Using the data given in the problem, we find that
                                          y(2)            0.25         ∼
                                                =                      = 0.5797.
                                           K       0.25 + 0.75e−1.42
        Consequently, y(2) ∼  = 46.7 × 106 kg.
           To find τ, we can first solve Eq. (12) for t. We obtain
                                                      (y0 /K)[1 − (y/K)]
                                              e−rt =                        ;
                                                      (y/K)[1 − (y0 /K)]
        hence
                                                   1 (y0 /K)[1 − (y/K)]
                                            t = − ln                          .                            (13)
                                                   r    (y/K)[1 − (y0 /K)]
        Using the given values of r and y0 /K and setting y/K = 0.75, we find that
                                        1      (0.25)(0.25)        1
                               τ=−          ln                =        ln 9 ∼
                                                                            = 3.095 years.
                                       0.71 (0.75)(0.75)          0.71
           The graphs of y/K versus t for the given parameter values and for several initial conditions
        are shown in Figure 2.5.4. The black curve corresponds to the initial condition y0 = 0.25K.
                         y /K
                        1.75
                        1.50
                        1.25
                        1.00
                        0.75
                        0.50
                        0.25
                                         1         2          3         4         5        6  t
                                                           τ ≅ 3.095
                   FIGURE 2.5.4 y/K versus t for population model of halibut in the Pacific
                       Ocean. The black curve satisfies the initial condition y(0)/K = 0.25.
        12A good source of information on the population dynamics and economics involved in making efficient
        use of a renewable resource, with particular emphasis on fisheries, is the book by Clark listed in the
        references at the end of this chapter. The parameter values used here are given on page 53 of this book
        and were obtained from a study by H. S. Mohring.
A Critical Threshold. We now turn to a consideration of the equation
                                   dy                y
                                       = −r 1 −         y,                          (14)
                                   dt                T
where r and T are given positive constants. Observe that (except for replacing the
parameter K by T) this equation differs from the logistic equation (7) only in
the presence of the minus sign on the right side. However, as we will see, the solutions
of Eq. (14) behave very differently from those of Eq. (7).
   For Eq. (14) the graph of f (y) versus y is the parabola shown in Figure 2.5.5.
The intercepts on the y-axis are the critical points y = 0 and y = T, corresponding
to the equilibrium solutions φ1 (t) = 0 and φ2 (t) = T. If 0 < y < T, then dy/dt < 0,
and y decreases as t increases. On the other hand, if y > T, then dy/dt > 0, and y
grows as t increases. Thus φ1 (t) = 0 is an asymptotically stable equilibrium solution
and φ2 (t) = T is an unstable one. Further, f  (y) is negative for 0 < y < T/2 and
positive for T/2 < y < T, so the graph of y versus t is concave up and concave down,
respectively, in these intervals. Also, f  (y) is positive for y > T, so the graph of y
versus t is also concave up there.
                           f ( y)
                                            T /2           T        y
                         –rT /4
                                       (T/2, –rT /4)
                  FIGURE 2.5.5    f (y) versus y for dy/dt = −r(1 − y/T)y.
   Figure 2.5.6(a) shows the phase line (the y-axis) for Eq. (14). The dots at y = 0 and
y = T are the critical points, or equilibrium solutions, and the arrows indicate where
solutions are either increasing or decreasing.
   Solution curves of Eq. (14) can now be sketched quickly, as follows. First draw the
equilibrium solutions y = 0 and y = T. Then sketch curves in the strip 0 < y < T that
are decreasing as t increases and change concavity as they cross the line y = T/2.
Next draw some curves above y = T that increase more and more steeply as t and y
increase. Make sure that all curves become flatter as y approaches either zero or T.
The result is Figure 2.5.6(b), which is a qualitatively accurate sketch of solutions of
Eq. (14) for any r and T. From this figure it appears that as time increases, y either
approaches zero or grows without bound, depending on whether the initial value y0
is less than or greater than T. Thus T is a threshold level, below which growth does
not occur.
   We can confirm the conclusions that we have reached through geometrical rea-
soning by solving the differential equation (14). This can be done by separating the
         y               y
                                                                φ 2(t) = T
        T                T
                      T /2
                                                                           φ 1(t) = 0
        0
                                                                                      t
          (a)                                           (b)
              FIGURE 2.5.6 Growth with a threshold: dy/dt = −r(1 − y/T)y.
                           (a) The phase line. (b) Plots of y versus t.
variables and integrating, just as we did for Eq. (7). However, if we note that Eq. (14)
can be obtained from Eq. (7) by replacing K by T and r by −r, then we can make
the same substitutions in the solution (11) and thereby obtain
                                                y0 T
                                    y=                        ,                         (15)
                                         y0 + (T − y0 )ert
which is the solution of Eq. (14) subject to the initial condition y(0) = y0 .
   If 0 < y0 < T, then it follows from Eq. (15) that y → 0 as t → ∞. This agrees with
our qualitative geometric analysis. If y0 > T, then the denominator on the right side
of Eq. (15) is zero for a certain finite value of t. We denote this value by t ∗ and
calculate it from
                                                      ∗
                                    y0 − (y0 − T)ert = 0,
which gives
                                            1       y0
                                      t∗ =    ln            .                           (16)
                                            r y0 − T
Thus, if the initial population y0 is above the threshold T, the threshold model predicts
that the graph of y versus t has a vertical asymptote at t = t ∗ ; in other words, the
population becomes unbounded in a finite time, whose value depends on y0 , T, and r.
The existence and location of this asymptote were not apparent from the geometric
analysis, so in this case the explicit solution yields additional important qualitative,
as well as quantitative, information.
   The populations of some species exhibit the threshold phenomenon. If too few
are present, then the species cannot propagate itself successfully and the popula-
tion becomes extinct. However, if the population is larger than the threshold level,
then further growth occurs. Of course, the population cannot become unbounded, so
eventually Eq. (14) must be modified to take this into account.
   Critical thresholds also occur in other circumstances. For example, in fluid mechan-
ics, equations of the form (7) or (14) often govern the evolution of a small disturbance
y in a laminar (or smooth) fluid flow. For instance, if Eq. (14) holds and y < T, then
the disturbance is damped out and the laminar flow persists. However, if y > T,
then the disturbance grows larger and the laminar flow breaks up into a turbulent
one. In this case T is referred to as the critical amplitude. Experimenters speak of
keeping the disturbance level in a wind tunnel low enough so that they can study
laminar flow over an airfoil, for example.
Logistic Growth with a Threshold. As we mentioned in the last subsection, the threshold
model (14) may need to be modified so that unbounded growth does not occur when
y is above the threshold T. The simplest way to do this is to introduce another factor
that will have the effect of making dy/dt negative when y is large. Thus we consider
                                dy                 y         y
                                     = −r 1 −            1−      y,                 (17)
                                 dt                T         K
where r > 0 and 0 < T < K.
   The graph of f (y) versus y is shown in Figure 2.5.7. In this problem there are three
critical points, y = 0, y = T, and y = K, corresponding to the equilibrium solutions
φ1 (t) = 0, φ2 (t) = T, and φ3 (t) = K, respectively. From Figure 2.5.7 we observe that
dy/dt > 0 for T < y < K, and consequently y is increasing there. Further, dy/dt < 0
for y < T and for y > K, so y is decreasing in these intervals. Consequently, the
equilibrium solutions φ1 (t) and φ3 (t) are asymptotically stable, and the solution φ2 (t)
is unstable.
                          f ( y)
                                         y2    T      y1    K         y
             FIGURE 2.5.7        f (y) versus y for dy/dt = −r(1 − y/T)(1 − y/K)y.
   The phase line for Eq. (17) is shown in Figure 2.5.8a, and the graphs of some
solutions are sketched in Figure 2.5.8b. You should make sure that you understand
the relation between these two figures, as well as the relation between Figures 2.5.7
and 2.5.8a. From Figure 2.5.8b we see that if y starts below the threshold T, then
y declines to ultimate extinction. On the other hand, if y starts above T, then y
eventually approaches the carrying capacity K. The inflection points on the graphs
of y versus t in Figure 2.5.8b correspond to the maximum and minimum points, y1
and y2 , respectively, on the graph of f (y) versus y in Figure 2.5.7. These values can
be obtained by differentiating the right side of Eq. (17) with respect to y, setting the
result equal to zero, and solving for y. We obtain
                                                 
                          y1, 2 = (K + T ± K 2 − KT + T 2 )/3,                      (18)
where the plus sign yields y1 and the minus sign y2 .
                    y                y
                                                                                         φ 3(t) = K
                  K                 K
                                    y1
                                                                                        φ 2(t) = T
                   T                T
                                    y2
                                                                                                φ 1(t) = 0
                   0
                                                                                                            t
                     (a)                                                (b)
               FIGURE 2.5.8        Logistic growth with a threshold: dy/dt = −r(1 − y/T)(1 − y/K)y.
                                        (a) The phase line. (b) Plots of y versus t.
             A model of this general sort apparently describes the population of the passen-
         ger pigeon,13 which was present in the United States in vast numbers until late in the
         nineteenth century. It was heavily hunted for food and for sport, and consequently its
         numbers were drastically reduced by the 1880s. Unfortunately, the passenger pigeon
         could apparently breed successfully only when present in a large concentration, cor-
         responding to a relatively high threshold T. Although a reasonably large number of
         individual birds remained alive in the late 1880s, there were not enough in any one
         place to permit successful breeding, and the population rapidly declined to extinc-
         tion. The last survivor died in 1914. The precipitous decline in the passenger pigeon
         population from huge numbers to extinction in a few decades was one of the early
         factors contributing to a concern for conservation in this country.
PROBLEMS Problems 1 through 6 involve equations of the form dy/dt = f (y). In each problem sketch the
         graph of f (y) versus y, determine the critical (equilibrium) points, and classify each one as
         asymptotically stable or unstable. Draw the phase line, and sketch several graphs of solutions
         in the ty-plane.
           1. dy/dt = ay + by2 ,         a > 0, b > 0, y0 ≥ 0
           2. dy/dt = ay + by2 ,         a > 0, b > 0, −∞ < y0 < ∞
           3. dy/dt = y(y − 1)(y − 2),           y0 ≥ 0
           4. dy/dt = ey − 1,         −∞ < y0 < ∞
           5. dy/dt = e−y − 1,          −∞ < y0 < ∞
           6. dy/dt = −2(arctan y)/(1 + y2 ),            −∞ < y0 < ∞
           7. Semistable Equilibrium Solutions. Sometimes a constant equilibrium solution has the
              property that solutions lying on one side of the equilibrium solution tend to approach it,
         13 See, for example, Oliver L. Austin, Jr., Birds of the World (New York: Golden Press, 1983), pp. 143–145.
    whereas solutions lying on the other side depart from it (see Figure 2.5.9). In this case the
    equilibrium solution is said to be semistable.
    (a) Consider the equation
                                                dy/dt = k(1 − y)2 ,                            (i)
    where k is a positive constant. Show that y = 1 is the only critical point, with the
    corresponding equilibrium solution φ(t) = 1.
    (b) Sketch f (y) versus y. Show that y is increasing as a function of t for y < 1 and also
    for y > 1. The phase line has upward-pointing arrows both below and above y = 1. Thus
    solutions below the equilibrium solution approach it, and those above it grow farther away.
    Therefore, φ(t) = 1 is semistable.
    (c) Solve Eq. (i) subject to the initial condition y(0) = y0 and confirm the conclusions
    reached in part (b).
                        y                                y
                                                                        φ (t) = k
                        k                                k
                                           φ (t) = k
                                                     t                           t
                                    (a)                             (b)
         FIGURE 2.5.9       In both cases the equilibrium solution φ(t) = k is semistable.
                                     (a) dy/dt ≤ 0; (b) dy/dt ≥ 0.
Problems 8 through 13 involve equations of the form dy/dt = f (y). In each problem sketch
the graph of f (y) versus y, determine the critical (equilibrium) points, and classify each one
asymptotically stable, unstable, or semistable (see Problem 7). Draw the phase line, and sketch
several graphs of solutions in the ty-plane.
 8. dy/dt = −k(y − 1)2 ,         k > 0, −∞ < y0 < ∞
 9. dy/dt = y2 (y2 − 1),        −∞ < y0 < ∞
10. dy/dt = y(1 − y2 ),        −∞ < y0 < ∞
                       √
11. dy/dt = ay − b y,           a > 0, b > 0, y0 ≥ 0
12. dy/dt = y2 (4 − y2 ),       −∞ < y0 < ∞
13. dy/dt = y2 (1 − y)2 ,       −∞ < y0 < ∞
14. Consider the equation dy/dt = f (y) and suppose that y1 is a critical point—that is,
    f (y1 ) = 0. Show that the constant equilibrium solution φ(t) = y1 is asymptotically stable
    if f  (y1 ) < 0 and unstable if f  (y1 ) > 0.
15. Suppose that a certain population obeys the logistic equation dy/dt = ry[1 − (y/K)].
    (a) If y0 = K/3, find the time τ at which the initial population has doubled. Find the value
    of τ corresponding to r = 0.025 per year.
    (b) If y0 /K = α, find the time T at which y(T)/K = β, where 0 < α, β < 1. Observe that
    T → ∞ as α → 0 or as β → 1. Find the value of T for r = 0.025 per year, α = 0.1, and
    β = 0.9.
16. Another equation that has been used to model population growth is the Gompertz14
     equation
                                            dy/dt = ry ln(K/y),
     where r and K are positive constants.
     (a) Sketch the graph of f (y) versus y, find the critical points, and determine whether each
     is asymptotically stable or unstable.
     (b) For 0 ≤ y ≤ K, determine where the graph of y versus t is concave up and where it is
     concave down.
     (c) For each y in 0 < y ≤ K, show that dy/dt as given by the Gompertz equation is never
     less than dy/dt as given by the logistic equation.
17. (a) Solve the Gompertz equation
                                            dy/dt = ry ln(K/y),
     subject to the initial condition y(0) = y0 .
     Hint: You may wish to let u = ln(y/K).
     (b) For the data given in Example 1 in the text (r = 0.71 per year, K = 80.5 × 106 kg,
     y0 /K = 0.25), use the Gompertz model to find the predicted value of y(2).
     (c) For the same data as in part (b), use the Gompertz model to find the time τ at which
     y(τ) = 0.75K.
18. A pond forms as water collects in a conical depression of radius a and depth h. Suppose that
     water flows in at a constant rate k and is lost through evaporation at a rate proportional
     to the surface area.
     (a) Show that the volume V(t) of water in the pond at time t satisfies the differential
     equation
                                      dV/dt = k − απ(3a/πh)2/3 V 2/3 ,
     where α is the coefficient of evaporation.
     (b) Find the equilibrium depth of water in the pond. Is the equilibrium asymptotically
     stable?
     (c) Find a condition that must be satisfied if the pond is not to overflow.
19. Consider a cylindrical water tank of constant cross section A. Water is pumped into the
     tank at a constant rate k and leaks out through a small hole of area a in the bottom
     of the tank. From Torricelli’s principle in hydrodynamics (see Problem         6 in Section 2.3)
     it follows that the rate at which water flows through the hole is αa 2gh, where h is the
     current depth of water in the tank, g is the acceleration due to gravity, and α is a contraction
     coefficient that satisfies 0.5 ≤ α ≤ 1.0.
     (a) Show that the depth of water in the tank at any time satisfies the equation
                                                            
                                        dh/dt = (k − αa 2gh )/A.
     (b) Determine the equilibrium depth he of water, and show that it is asymptotically stable.
     Observe that he does not depend on A.
14 Benjamin Gompertz (1779–1865) was an English actuary. He developed his model for population growth,
published in 1825, in the course of constructing mortality tables for his insurance company.
Harvesting a Renewable Resource. Suppose that the population y of a certain species of fish
(for example, tuna or halibut) in a given area of the ocean is described by the logistic equation
                                        dy/dt = r(1 − y/K)y.
Although it is desirable to utilize this source of food, it is intuitively clear that if too many fish
are caught, then the fish population may be reduced below a useful level and possibly even
driven to extinction. Problems 20 and 21 explore some of the questions involved in formulating
a rational strategy for managing the fishery.15
20. At a given level of effort, it is reasonable to assume that the rate at which fish are caught
     depends on the population y: the more fish there are, the easier it is to catch them. Thus we
     assume that the rate at which fish are caught is given by Ey, where E is a positive constant,
     with units of 1/time, that measures the total effort made to harvest the given species of
     fish. To include this effect, the logistic equation is replaced by
                                       dy/dt = r(1 − y/K)y − Ey.                                      (i)
     This equation is known as the Schaefer model after the biologist M. B. Schaefer, who
     applied it to fish populations.
     (a) Show that if E < r, then there are two equilibrium points, y1 = 0 and
     y2 = K(1 − E/r) > 0.
     (b) Show that y = y1 is unstable and y = y2 is asymptotically stable.
     (c) A sustainable yield Y of the fishery is a rate at which fish can be caught indefinitely.
     It is the product of the effort E and the asymptotically stable population y2 . Find Y as a
     function of the effort E; the graph of this function is known as the yield–effort curve.
     (d) Determine E so as to maximize Y and thereby find the maximum sustainable yield Ym .
21. In this problem we assume that fish are caught at a constant rate h independent of the size
     of the fish population. Then y satisfies
                                        dy/dt = r(1 − y/K)y − h.                                      (i)
     The assumption of a constant catch rate h may be reasonable when y is large but becomes
     less so when y is small.
     (a) If h < rK/4, show that Eq. (i) has two equilibrium points y1 and y2 with y1 < y2 ;
     determine these points.
     (b) Show that y1 is unstable and y2 is asymptotically stable.
     (c) From a plot of f (y) versus y, show that if the initial population y0 > y1 , then y → y2
     as t → ∞, but that if y0 < y1 , then y decreases as t increases. Note that y = 0 is not an
     equilibrium point, so if y0 < y1 , then extinction will be reached in a finite time.
     (d) If h > rK/4, show that y decreases to zero as t increases, regardless of the value of y0 .
     (e) If h = rK/4, show that there is a single equilibrium point y = K/2 and that this point
     is semistable (see Problem 7). Thus the maximum sustainable yield is hm = rK/4, corre-
     sponding to the equilibrium value y = K/2. Observe that hm has the same value as Ym
     in Problem 20(d). The fishery is considered to be overexploited if y is reduced to a level
     below K/2.
15An excellent treatment of this kind of problem, which goes far beyond what is outlined here, may be
found in the book by Clark mentioned previously, especially in the first two chapters. Numerous additional
references are given there.
Epidemics. The use of mathematical methods to study the spread of contagious diseases
goes back at least to some work by Daniel Bernoulli in 1760 on smallpox. In more recent years
many mathematical models have been proposed and studied for many different diseases.16
Problems 22 through 24 deal with a few of the simpler models and the conclusions that can be
drawn from them. Similar models have also been used to describe the spread of rumors and
of consumer products.
22. Suppose that a given population can be divided into two parts: those who have a given
     disease and can infect others, and those who do not have it but are susceptible. Let x be the
     proportion of susceptible individuals and y the proportion of infectious individuals; then
     x + y = 1. Assume that the disease spreads by contact between sick and well members of
     the population and that the rate of spread dy/dt is proportional to the number of such
     contacts. Further, assume that members of both groups move about freely among each
     other, so the number of contacts is proportional to the product of x and y. Since x = 1 − y,
     we obtain the initial value problem
                                   dy/dt = αy(1 − y),           y(0) = y0 ,                         (i)
     where α is a positive proportionality factor, and y0 is the initial proportion of infectious
     individuals.
     (a) Find the equilibrium points for the differential equation (i) and determine whether
     each is asymptotically stable, semistable, or unstable.
     (b) Solve the initial value problem (i) and verify that the conclusions you reached in
     part (a) are correct. Show that y(t) → 1 as t → ∞, which means that ultimately the disease
     spreads through the entire population.
23. Some diseases (such as typhoid fever) are spread largely by carriers, individuals who can
     transmit the disease but who exhibit no overt symptoms. Let x and y denote the propor-
     tions of susceptibles and carriers, respectively, in the population. Suppose that carriers are
     identified and removed from the population at a rate β, so
                                                dy/dt = −βy.                                        (i)
     Suppose also that the disease spreads at a rate proportional to the product of x and y; thus
                                               dx/dt = −αxy.                                       (ii)
     (a) Determine y at any time t by solving Eq. (i) subject to the initial condition y(0) = y0 .
     (b) Use the result of part (a) to find x at any time t by solving Eq. (ii) subject to the initial
     condition x(0) = x0 .
     (c) Find the proportion of the population that escapes the epidemic by finding the limiting
     value of x as t → ∞.
24. Daniel Bernoulli’s work in 1760 had the goal of appraising the effectiveness of a contro-
     versial inoculation program against smallpox, which at that time was a major threat to
     public health. His model applies equally well to any other disease that, once contracted
     and survived, confers a lifetime immunity.
        Consider the cohort of individuals born in a given year (t = 0), and let n(t) be the
     number of these individuals surviving t years later. Let x(t) be the number of members of
     this cohort who have not had smallpox by year t and who are therefore still susceptible.
     Let β be the rate at which susceptibles contract smallpox, and let ν be the rate at which
16A standard source is the book by Bailey listed in the references. The models in Problems 22, 23, and
24 are discussed by Bailey in Chapters 5, 10, and 20, respectively.
     people who contract smallpox die from the disease. Finally, let μ(t) be the death rate from
     all causes other than smallpox. Then dx/dt, the rate at which the number of susceptibles
     declines, is given by
                                          dx/dt = −[β + μ(t)]x.                                    (i)
    The first term on the right side of Eq. (i) is the rate at which susceptibles contract smallpox,
     and the second term is the rate at which they die from all other causes. Also
                                         dn/dt = −νβx − μ(t)n,                                    (ii)
     where dn/dt is the death rate of the entire cohort, and the two terms on the right side are
     the death rates due to smallpox and to all other causes, respectively.
     (a) Let z = x/n, and show that z satisfies the initial value problem
                                  dz/dt = −βz(1 − νz),         z(0) = 1.                         (iii)
     Observe that the initial value problem (iii) does not depend on μ(t).
     (b) Find z(t) by solving Eq. (iii).
     (c) Bernoulli estimated that ν = β = 18 . Using these values, determine the proportion of
     20-year-olds who have not had smallpox.
     Note: On the basis of the model just described and the best mortality data available at the
     time, Bernoulli calculated that if deaths due to smallpox could be eliminated (ν = 0), then
     approximately 3 years could be added to the average life expectancy (in 1760) of 26 years,
     7 months. He therefore supported the inoculation program.
Bifurcation Points.     For an equation of the form
                                           dy/dt = f (a, y),                                       (i)
where a is a real parameter, the critical points (equilibrium solutions) usually depend on the
value of a.As a steadily increases or decreases,it often happens that at a certain value of a,called
a bifurcation point, critical points come together, or separate, and equilibrium solutions may
be either lost or gained. Bifurcation points are of great interest in many applications, because
near them the nature of the solution of the underlying differential equation is undergoing an
abrupt change. For example, in fluid mechanics a smooth (laminar) flow may break up and
become turbulent. Or an axially loaded column may suddenly buckle and exhibit a large lateral
displacement. Or, as the amount of one of the chemicals in a certain mixture is increased, spiral
wave patterns of varying color may suddenly emerge in an originally quiescent fluid. Problems
25 through 27 describe three types of bifurcations that can occur in simple equations of the
form (i).
25. Consider the equation
                                             dy/dt = a − y2 .                                     (ii)
     (a) Find all of the critical points for Eq. (ii). Observe that there are no critical points if
     a < 0, one critical point if a = 0, and two critical points if a > 0.
     (b) Draw the phase line in each case and determine whether each critical point is
     asymptotically stable, semistable, or unstable.
     (c) In each case sketch several solutions of Eq. (ii) in the ty-plane.
     (d) If we plot the location of the critical points as a function of a in the ay-plane, we obtain
     Figure 2.5.10. This is called the bifurcation diagram for Eq. (ii). The bifurcation at a = 0
     is called a saddle–node bifurcation. This name is more natural in the context of second
     order systems, which are discussed in Chapter 9.
                                      y
                                      2
                                      1                       Asymptotically stable
               –2         –1                     1          2          3          4 a
                                    –1                        Unstable
                                    –2
                    FIGURE 2.5.10        Bifurcation diagram for y = a − y2 .
26. Consider the equation
                                      dy/dt = ay − y3 = y(a − y2 ).                             (iii)
    (a) Again consider the cases a < 0, a = 0, and a > 0. In each case find the critical points,
    draw the phase line, and determine whether each critical point is asymptotically stable,
    semistable, or unstable.
    (b) In each case sketch several solutions of Eq. (iii) in the ty-plane.
    (c) Draw the bifurcation diagram for Eq. (iii)—that is, plot the location of the critical
    points versus a. For Eq. (iii) the bifurcation point at a = 0 is called a pitchfork bifurcation.
    Your diagram may suggest why this name is appropriate.
27. Consider the equation
                                       dy/dt = ay − y2 = y(a − y).                              (iv)
    (a) Again consider the cases a < 0, a = 0, and a > 0. In each case find the critical points,
    draw the phase line, and determine whether each critical point is asymptotically stable,
    semistable, or unstable.
    (b) In each case sketch several solutions of Eq. (iv) in the ty-plane.
    (c) Draw the bifurcation diagram for Eq. (iv). Observe that for Eq. (iv) there are the
    same number of critical points for a < 0 and a > 0 but that their stability has changed.
    For a < 0 the equilibrium solution y = 0 is asymptotically stable and y = a is unstable,
    while for a > 0 the situation is reversed. Thus there has been an exchange of stability as a
    passes through the bifurcation point a = 0. This type of bifurcation is called a transcritical
    bifurcation.
28. Chemical Reactions. A second order chemical reaction involves the interaction (colli-
    sion) of one molecule of a substance P with one molecule of a substance Q to produce
    one molecule of a new substance X ; this is denoted by P + Q → X . Suppose that p and
    q, where p  = q, are the initial concentrations of P and Q, respectively, and let x(t) be the
    concentration of X at time t. Then p − x(t) and q − x(t) are the concentrations of P and
    Q at time t, and the rate at which the reaction occurs is given by the equation
                                        dx/dt = α(p − x)(q − x),                                  (i)
    where α is a positive constant.
    (a) If x(0) = 0, determine the limiting value of x(t) as t → ∞ without solving the
    differential equation. Then solve the initial value problem and find x(t) for any t.
                   (b) If the substances P and Q are the same, then p = q and Eq. (i) is replaced by
                                                         dx/dt = α(p − x)2 .                                 (ii)
                   If x(0) = 0, determine the limiting value of x(t) as t → ∞ without solving the differential
                   equation. Then solve the initial value problem and determine x(t) for any t.
2.6 Exact Equations and Integrating Factors
               For first order equations there are a number of integration methods that are applica-
               ble to various classes of problems. The most important of these are linear equations
               and separable equations, which we have discussed previously. Here, we consider a
               class of equations known as exact equations for which there is also a well-defined
               method of solution. Keep in mind, however, that those first order equations that
               can be solved by elementary integration methods are rather special; most first order
               equations cannot be solved in this way.
               Solve the differential equation
   EXAMPLE                                           2x + y2 + 2xyy = 0.                                     (1)
      1          The equation is neither linear nor separable, so the methods suitable for those types of
               equations are not applicable here. However, observe that the function ψ(x, y) = x2 + xy2 has
               the property that
                                                            ∂ψ              ∂ψ
                                               2x + y2 =       ,    2xy =       .                             (2)
                                                            ∂x               ∂y
               Therefore, the differential equation can be written as
                                                       ∂ψ     ∂ψ dy
                                                           +         = 0.                                     (3)
                                                        ∂x    ∂y dx
               Assuming that y is a function of x, we can use the chain rule to write the left side of Eq. (3) as
               dψ(x, y)/dx. Then Eq. (3) has the form
                                                dψ            d 2
                                                    (x, y) =     (x + xy2 ) = 0.                              (4)
                                                dx           dx
               By integrating Eq. (4) we obtain
                                                   ψ(x, y) = x2 + xy2 = c,                                    (5)
               where c is an arbitrary constant. The level curves of ψ(x, y) are the integral curves of Eq. (1).
               Solutions of Eq. (1) are defined implicitly by Eq. (5).
                  In solving Eq. (1) the key step was the recognition that there is a function ψ that
               satisfies Eqs. (2). More generally, let the differential equation
                                                  M(x, y) + N(x, y)y = 0                                    (6)
              be given. Suppose that we can identify a function ψ(x, y) such that
                                           ∂ψ                            ∂ψ
                                               (x, y) = M(x, y),             (x, y) = N(x, y),                        (7)
                                           ∂x                            ∂y
              and such that ψ(x, y) = c defines y = φ(x) implicitly as a differentiable function
              of x. Then
                                                                 ∂ψ ∂ψ dy              d
                                      M(x, y) + N(x, y)y =           +            =      ψ[x, φ(x)]
                                                                 ∂x       ∂y dx        dx
              and the differential equation (6) becomes
                                                           d
                                                              ψ[x, φ(x)] = 0.                                         (8)
                                                          dx
              In this case Eq. (6) is said to be an exact differential equation. Solutions of Eq. (6),
              or the equivalent Eq. (8), are given implicitly by
                                                              ψ(x, y) = c,                                            (9)
              where c is an arbitrary constant.
                  In Example 1 it was relatively easy to see that the differential equation was exact
              and, in fact, easy to find its solution, at least implicitly, by recognizing the required
              function ψ. For more complicated equations it may not be possible to do this so
              easily. How can we tell whether a given equation is exact, and if it is, how can we find
              the function ψ(x, y)? The following theorem answers the first question, and its proof
              provides a way of answering the second.
Theorem 2.6.1 Let the functions M, N, My , and Nx , where subscripts denote partial derivatives,
              be continuous in the rectangular17 region R: α < x < β, γ < y < δ. Then Eq. (6)
                                                      M(x, y) + N(x, y)y = 0
              is an exact differential equation in R if and only if
                                                        My (x, y) = Nx (x, y)                                     (10)
              at each point of R. That is, there exists a function ψ satisfying Eqs. (7),
                                           ψx (x, y) = M(x, y),         ψy (x, y) = N(x, y),
              if and only if M and N satisfy Eq. (10).
              17 It is not essential that the region be rectangular, only that it be simply connected. In two dimensions
              this means that the region has no holes in its interior. Thus, for example, rectangular or circular regions
              are simply connected, but an annular region is not. More details can be found in most books on advanced
              calculus.
   The proof of this theorem has two parts. First, we show that if there is a function
ψ such that Eqs. (7) are true, then it follows that Eq. (10) is satisfied. Computing
My and Nx from Eqs. (7), we obtain
                     My (x, y) = ψxy (x, y),          Nx (x, y) = ψyx (x, y).        (11)
Since My and Nx are continuous, it follows that ψxy and ψyx are also continuous. This
guarantees their equality, and Eq. (10) is valid.
   We now show that if M and N satisfy Eq. (10), then Eq. (6) is exact. The proof
involves the construction of a function ψ satisfying Eqs. (7)
                       ψx (x, y) = M(x, y),           ψy (x, y) = N(x, y).
We begin by integrating the first of Eqs. (7) with respect to x, holding y constant. We
obtain
                                  ψ(x, y) = Q(x, y) + h(y),                          (12)
where Q(x, y) is any differentiable function such that ∂Q(x, y)/∂x = M(x, y). For
example, we might choose
                                                x
                                  Q(x, y) =         M(s, y) ds,                      (13)
                                                 x0
where x0 is some specified constant in α < x0 < β. The function h in Eq. (12) is an
arbitrary differentiable function of y, playing the role of the arbitrary constant. Now
we must show that it is always possible to choose h(y) so that the second of Eqs. (7)
is satisfied—that is, ψy = N. By differentiating Eq. (12) with respect to y and setting
the result equal to N(x, y), we obtain
                                       ∂Q
                          ψy (x, y) =       (x, y) + h (y) = N(x, y).
                                        ∂y
Then, solving for h (y), we have
                                                        ∂Q
                                h (y) = N(x, y) −          (x, y).                  (14)
                                                        ∂y
   In order for us to determine h(y) from Eq. (14), the right side of Eq. (14), despite
its appearance, must be a function of y only. One way to show that this is true is to
show that its derivative with respect to x is zero. Thus we differentiate the right side
of Eq. (14) with respect to x, obtaining
                                   ∂N              ∂ ∂Q
                                       (x, y) −           (x, y).                    (15)
                                    ∂x            ∂x ∂y
By interchanging the order of differentiation in the second term of Eq. (15), we have
                                   ∂N              ∂ ∂Q
                                       (x, y) −           (x, y),
                                    ∂x            ∂y ∂x
or, since ∂Q/∂x = M,
                                     ∂N             ∂M
                                         (x, y) −       (x, y),
                                     ∂x              ∂y
which is zero on account of Eq. (10). Hence, despite its apparent form, the right side of
Eq. (14) does not, in fact, depend on x. Then we find h(y) by integrating Eq. (14), and
        upon substituting this function in Eq. (12), we obtain the required function ψ(x, y).
        This completes the proof of Theorem 2.6.1.
           It is possible to obtain an explicit expression for ψ(x, y) in terms of integrals (see
        Problem 17), but in solving specific exact equations, it is usually simpler and easier just
        to repeat the procedure used in the preceding proof. That is, integrate ψx = M with
        respect to x, including an arbitrary function of h(y) instead of an arbitrary constant,
        and then differentiate the result with respect to y and set it equal to N. Finally, use
        this last equation to solve for h(y). The next example illustrates this procedure.
        Solve the differential equation
EXAMPLE
                                    (y cos x + 2xey ) + (sin x + x2 ey − 1)y = 0.                    (16)
   2
           By calculating My and Nx , we find that
                                        My (x, y) = cos x + 2xey = Nx (x, y),
        so the given equation is exact. Thus there is a ψ(x, y) such that
                                             ψx (x, y) = y cos x + 2xey ,
                                             ψy (x, y) = sin x + x2 ey − 1.
        Integrating the first of these equations, we obtain
                                           ψ(x, y) = y sin x + x2 ey + h(y).                          (17)
        Setting ψy = N gives
                                ψy (x, y) = sin x + x2 ey + h (y) = sin x + x2 ey − 1.
        Thus h (y) = −1 and h(y) = −y. The constant of integration can be omitted since any solution
        of the preceding differential equation is satisfactory; we do not require the most general one.
        Substituting for h(y) in Eq. (17) gives
                                             ψ(x, y) = y sin x + x2 ey − y.
        Hence solutions of Eq. (16) are given implicitly by
                                                y sin x + x2 ey − y = c.                              (18)
        Solve the differential equation
EXAMPLE
                                            (3xy + y2 ) + (x2 + xy)y = 0.                            (19)
   3
           We have
                                    My (x, y) = 3x + 2y,        Nx (x, y) = 2x + y;
        since My = Nx , the given equation is not exact. To see that it cannot be solved by the procedure
        described above, let us seek a function ψ such that
                                   ψx (x, y) = 3xy + y2 ,       ψy (x, y) = x2 + xy.                  (20)
           Integrating the first of Eqs. (20) gives
                                            ψ(x, y) = 23 x2 y + xy2 + h(y),                           (21)
where h is an arbitrary function of y only. To try to satisfy the second of Eqs. (20), we compute
ψy from Eq. (21) and set it equal to N, obtaining
                                     x + 2xy + h (y) = x2 + xy
                                   3 2
                                   2
or
                                        h (y) = − 21 x2 − xy.                               (22)
Since the right side of Eq. (22) depends on x as well as y, it is impossible to solve Eq. (22) for
h(y). Thus there is no ψ(x, y) satisfying both of Eqs. (20).
Integrating Factors. It is sometimes possible to convert a differential equation that is
not exact into an exact equation by multiplying the equation by a suitable integrating
factor. Recall that this is the procedure that we used in solving linear equations in
Section 2.1. To investigate the possibility of implementing this idea more generally,
let us multiply the equation
                                    M(x, y) + N(x, y)y = 0                                  (23)
by a function μ and then try to choose μ so that the resulting equation
                            μ(x, y)M(x, y) + μ(x, y)N(x, y)y = 0                            (24)
is exact. By Theorem 2.6.1, Eq. (24) is exact if and only if
                                        (μM)y = (μN)x .                                      (25)
Since M and N are given functions, Eq. (25) states that the integrating factor μ must
satisfy the first order partial differential equation
                              Mμy − Nμx + (My − Nx )μ = 0.                                   (26)
If a function μ satisfying Eq. (26) can be found, then Eq. (24) will be exact. The
solution of Eq. (24) can then be obtained by the method described in the first part of
this section. The solution found in this way also satisfies Eq. (23), since the integrating
factor μ can be canceled out of Eq. (24).
   A partial differential equation of the form (26) may have more than one solution;
if this is the case, any such solution may be used as an integrating factor of Eq. (23).
This possible nonuniqueness of the integrating factor is illustrated in Example 4.
   Unfortunately, Eq. (26), which determines the integrating factor μ, is ordinarily
at least as hard to solve as the original equation (23). Therefore, although in princi-
ple integrating factors are powerful tools for solving differential equations, in practice
they can be found only in special cases. The most important situations in which simple
integrating factors can be found occur when μ is a function of only one of the variables
x or y, instead of both.
   Let us determine conditions on M and N so that Eq. (23) has an integrating factor
μ that depends on x only. If we assume that μ is a function of x only, then the partial
derivative μx reduces to the ordinary derivative dμ/dx and μy = 0. Making these
substitutions in Eq. (26), we find that
                                       dμ       My − Nx
                                             =              μ.                               (27)
                                        dx           N
        If (My − Nx )/N is a function of x only, then there is an integrating factor μ that also
        depends only on x; further, μ(x) can be found by solving Eq. (27), which is both linear
        and separable.
           A similar procedure can be used to determine a condition under which Eq. (23)
        has an integrating factor depending only on y; see Problem 23.
        Find an integrating factor for the equation
EXAMPLE
                                            (3xy + y2 ) + (x2 + xy)y = 0                              (19)
   4
        and then solve the equation.
           In Example 3 we showed that this equation is not exact. Let us determine whether it has an
        integrating factor that depends on x only. On computing the quantity (My − Nx )/N, we find
        that
                                 My (x, y) − Nx (x, y)      3x + 2y − (2x + y)         1
                                                         =                         = .                 (28)
                                        N(x, y)                     x + xy
                                                                     2                 x
        Thus there is an integrating factor μ that is a function of x only, and it satisfies the differential
        equation
                                                        dμ       μ
                                                             = .                                       (29)
                                                        dx       x
        Hence
                                                        μ(x) = x.                                      (30)
        Multiplying Eq. (19) by this integrating factor, we obtain
                                          (3x2 y + xy2 ) + (x3 + x2 y)y = 0.                          (31)
        Equation (31) is exact, since
                                    ∂                                      ∂ 3
                                      (3x2 y + xy2 ) = 3x2 + 2xy =           (x + x2 y).
                                   ∂y                                     ∂x
        Thus there is a function ψ such that
                                 ψx (x, y) = 3x2 y + xy2 ,         ψy (x, y) = x3 + x2 y.              (32)
        Integrating the first of Eqs. (32), we obtain
                                            ψ(x, y) = x3 y + 21 x2 y2 + h(y).
        Substituting this expression for ψ(x, y) in the second of Eqs. (32), we find that
                                            x3 + x2 y + h (y) = x3 + x2 y,
        so h (y) = 0 and h(y) is a constant. Thus the solutions of Eq. (31), and hence of Eq. (19), are
        given implicitly by
                                                   x3 y + 21 x2 y2 = c.                                (33)
        Solutions may also be found in explicit form since Eq. (33) is quadratic in y.
           You may also verify that a second integrating factor for Eq. (19) is
                                                                   1
                                                μ(x, y) =
                                                             xy(2x + y)
        and that the same solution is obtained, though with much greater difficulty, if this integrating
        factor is used (see Problem 32).
PROBLEMS Determine whether each of the equations in Problems 1 through 12 is exact. If it is exact, find
         the solution.
          1. (2x + 3) + (2y − 2)y = 0                                      2. (2x + 4y) + (2x − 2y)y = 0
          3. (3x2 − 2xy + 2) + (6y2 − x2 + 3)y = 0                         4. (2xy2 + 2y) + (2x2 y + 2x)y = 0
              dy       ax + by                                                 dy       ax − by
          5.      =−                                                        6.     =−
              dx       bx + cy                                                 dx       bx − cy
          7. (ex sin y − 2y sin x) + (ex cos y + 2 cos x)y = 0
          8. (ex sin y + 3y) − (3x − ex sin y)y = 0
          9. (yexy cos 2x − 2exy sin 2x + 2x) + (xexy cos 2x − 3)y = 0
         10. (y/x + 6x) + (ln x − 2)y = 0,          x>0
         11. (x ln y + xy) + (y ln x + xy)y = 0;        x > 0, y > 0
                    x               y       dy
         12.                + 2                 =0
              (x2 + y2 )3/2    (x + y2 )3/2 dx
         In each of Problems 13 and 14, solve the given initial value problem and determine at least
         approximately where the solution is valid.
         13. (2x − y) + (2y − x)y = 0,          y(1) = 3
         14. (9x2 + y − 1) − (4y − x)y = 0,          y(1) = 0
         In each of Problems 15 and 16, find the value of b for which the given equation is exact, and
         then solve it using that value of b.
         15. (xy2 + bx2 y) + (x + y)x2 y = 0                             16. (ye2xy + x) + bxe2xy y = 0
         17. Assume that Eq. (6) meets the requirements of Theorem 2.6.1 in a rectangle R and is
             therefore exact. Show that a possible function ψ(x, y) is
                                                      x                 y
                                          ψ(x, y) =      M(s, y0 ) ds +     N(x, t) dt,
                                                      x0                 y0
             where (x0 , y0 ) is a point in R.
         18. Show that any separable equation
                                                      M(x) + N(y)y = 0
             is also exact.
         In each of Problems 19 through 22, show that the given equation is not exact but becomes
         exact when multiplied by the given integrating factor. Then solve the equation.
         19. x2 y3 + x(1 + y2 )y = 0,       μ(x, y) = 1/xy3
                                      
                sin y                     cos y + 2e−x cos x 
         20.          − 2e−x sin x +                           y = 0,         μ(x, y) = yex
                  y                                y
         21. y + (2x − yey )y = 0,        μ(x, y) = y
         22. (x + 2) sin y + (x cos y)y = 0,        μ(x, y) = xex
         23. Show that if (Nx − My )/M = Q, where Q is a function of y only, then the differential
             equation
                                                         M + Ny = 0
             has an integrating factor of the form
                                                                
                                                   μ(y) = exp       Q(y) dy.
               24. Show that if (Nx − My )/(xM − yN) = R, where R depends on the quantity xy only, then
                   the differential equation
                                                              M + Ny = 0
                   has an integrating factor of the form μ(xy). Find a general formula for this integrating
                   factor.
              In each of Problems 25 through 31, find an integrating factor and solve the given equation.
               25. (3x2 y + 2xy + y3 ) + (x2 + y2 )y = 0                    26. y = e2x + y − 1
               27. 1 + (x/y − sin y)y = 0                                   28. y + (2xy − e−2y )y = 0
                                              
               29. e + (e cot y + 2y csc y)y = 0
                    x      x
               30. [4(x3 /y2 ) + (3/y)] + [3(x/y2 ) + 4y]y = 0
                                  2
                           6        x      y dy
               31. 3x +         +      +3          =0
                           y        y      x dx
                   Hint: See Problem 24.
               32. Solve the differential equation
                                                     (3xy + y2 ) + (x2 + xy)y = 0
                   using the integrating factor μ(x, y) = [xy(2x + y)]−1 . Verify that the solution is the same
                   as that obtained in Example 4 with a different integrating factor.
2.7 Numerical Approximations: Euler’s Method
              Recall two important facts about the first order initial value problem
                                                dy
                                                      = f (t, y),     y(t0 ) = y0 .                          (1)
                                                 dt
              First, if f and ∂f /∂y are continuous, then the initial value problem (1) has a unique
              solution y = φ(t) in some interval surrounding the initial point t = t0 . Second, it is
              usually not possible to find the solution φ by symbolic manipulations of the differ-
              ential equation. Up to now we have considered the main exceptions to the latter
              statement: differential equations that are linear, separable, or exact, or that can be
              transformed into one of these types. Nevertheless, it remains true that solutions of
              the vast majority of first order initial value problems cannot be found by analytical
              means, such as those considered in the first part of this chapter.
                 Therefore, it is important to be able to approach the problem in other ways. As we
              have already seen, one of these ways is to draw a direction field for the differential
              equation (which does not involve solving the equation) and then to visualize the
              behavior of solutions from the direction field. This has the advantage of being a
              relatively simple process, even for complicated differential equations. However, it
              does not lend itself to quantitative computations or comparisons, and this is often a
              critical shortcoming.
                 For example, Figure 2.7.1 shows a direction field for the differential equation
                                                      dy
                                                           = 3 − 2t − 0.5y.                                  (2)
                                                       dt
From the direction field you can visualize the behavior of solutions on the rectangle
shown in the figure. On this rectangle a solution starting at a point on the y-axis
initially increases with t, but it soon reaches a maximum value and then begins to
decrease as t increases further.
              y
              3
              2
              1
                                     1                     2                   3 t
             –1
               FIGURE 2.7.1 A direction field for Eq. (2): dy/dt = 3 − 2t − 0.5y.
   You may also observe that in Figure 2.7.1 many tangent line segments at successive
values of t almost touch each other. It takes only a bit of imagination to consider
starting at a point on the y-axis and linking line segments for successive values of t in
the grid, thereby producing a piecewise linear graph. Such a graph would apparently
be an approximation to a solution of the differential equation. To convert this idea
into a useful method for generating approximate solutions, we must answer several
questions, including the following:
1.   Can we carry out the linking of tangent lines in a systematic and straightforward
     manner?
2.   If so, does the resulting piecewise linear function provide an approximation to an actual
     solution of the differential equation?
3.   If so, can we assess the accuracy of the approximation? That is, can we estimate how far
     the approximation deviates from the solution itself?
   It turns out that the answer to each of these questions is affirmative. The resulting
method was originated by Euler about 1768 and is referred to as the tangent line
method or the Euler method. We will deal with the first two questions in this section
but will defer a systematic discussion of the third question until Chapter 8.
   To see how the Euler method works, let us consider how we might use tangent
lines to approximate the solution y = φ(t) of Eqs. (1) near t = t0 . We know that the
solution passes through the initial point (t0 , y0 ), and from the differential equation, we
also know that its slope at this point is f (t0 , y0 ). Thus we can write down an equation
for the line tangent to the solution curve at (t0 , y0 ), namely,
                                   y = y0 + f (t0 , y0 )(t − t0 ).                           (3)
The tangent line is a good approximation to the actual solution curve on an interval
short enough so that the slope of the solution does not change appreciably from its
value at the initial point; see Figure 2.7.2. Thus, if t1 is close enough to t0 , we can
approximate φ(t1 ) by the value y1 determined by substituting t = t1 into the tangent
line approximation at t = t0 ; thus
                                 y1 = y0 + f (t0 , y0 )(t1 − t0 ).                           (4)
                          y
                                                     y = y0 + f(t0, y0) (t – t0)
                        y1
                     φ (t1)
                                                       y = φ (t)
                        y0
                                t0          t1                                    t
                       FIGURE 2.7.2 A tangent line approximation.
   To proceed further, we can try to repeat the process. Unfortunately, we do not know
the value φ(t1 ) of the solution at t1 . The best we can do is to use the approximate
value y1 instead. Thus we construct the line through (t1 , y1 ) with the slope f (t1 , y1 ),
                                   y = y1 + f (t1 , y1 )(t − t1 ).                           (5)
To approximate the value of φ(t) at a nearby point t2 , we use Eq. (5) instead, obtaining
                                 y2 = y1 + f (t1 , y1 )(t2 − t1 ).                           (6)
   Continuing in this manner, we use the value of y calculated at each step to deter-
mine the slope of the approximation for the next step. The general expression for the
tangent line starting at (tn , yn ) is
                                   y = yn + f (tn , yn )(t − tn );                           (7)
hence the approximate value yn+1 at tn+1 in terms of tn , tn+1 , and yn is
                   yn+1 = yn + f (tn , yn )(tn+1 − tn ),         n = 0, 1, 2, . . . .        (8)
If we introduce the notation fn = f (tn , yn ), then we can rewrite Eq. (8) as
                     yn+1 = yn + fn · (tn+1 − tn ),          n = 0, 1, 2, . . . .            (9)
Finally, if we assume that there is a uniform step size h between the points t0 , t1 , t2 , . . . ,
then tn+1 = tn + h for each n, and we obtain Euler’s formula in the form
                            yn+1 = yn + fn h,         n = 0, 1, 2, . . . .                 (10)
            To use Euler’s method, you repeatedly evaluate Eq. (9) or Eq. (10), depending on
        whether or not the step size is constant, using the result of each step to execute the
        next step. In this way you generate a sequence of values y1 , y2 , y3 , . . . that approximate
        the values of the solution φ(t) at the points t1 , t2 , t3 , . . . . If, instead of a sequence of
        points, you need a function to approximate the solution φ(t), then you can use the
        piecewise linear function constructed from the collection of tangent line segments.
        That is, let y be given in [t0 , t1 ] by Eq. (7) with n = 0, in [t1 , t2 ] by Eq. (7) with n = 1,
        and so on.
        Consider the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                          dy
   1                                           = 3 − 2t − 0.5y,          y(0) = 1.                      (11)
                                           dt
        Use Euler’s method with step size h = 0.2 to find approximate values of the solution of Eqs. (11)
        at t = 0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8,and 1. Compare them with the corresponding values of the actual solution
        of the initial value problem.
            Note that the differential equation in the given initial value problem is the same as in Eq. (2).
        This equation is linear, so it can be solved as in Section 2.1, using the integrating factor et/2 .
        The resulting solution of the initial value problem (11) is
                                              y = φ(t) = 14 − 4t − 13e−t/2 .                            (12)
        To approximate this solution by means of Euler’s method, note that in this case
        f (t, y) = 3 − 2t − 0.5y. Using the initial values t0 = 0 and y0 = 1, we find that
                                      f0 = f (t0 , y0 ) = f (0, 1) = 3 − 0 − 0.5 = 2.5
        and then, from Eq. (3), the tangent line approximation near t = 0 is
                                             y = 1 + 2.5(t − 0) = 1 + 2.5t.                             (13)
        Setting t = 0.2 in Eq. (13), we find the approximate value y1 of the solution at t = 0.2, namely,
                                                y1 = 1 + (2.5)(0.2) = 1.5.
        At the next step we have
                        f1 = f (0.2, 1.5) = 3 − 2(0.2) − (0.5)(1.5) = 3 − 0.4 − 0.75 = 1.85.
        Then the tangent line approximation near t = 0.2 is
                                        y = 1.5 + 1.85(t − 0.2) = 1.13 + 1.85t.                         (14)
        Evaluating the expression in Eq. (14) for t = 0.4, we obtain
                                              y2 = 1.13 + 1.85(0.4) = 1.87.
        Repeating this computational procedure three more times, we obtain the results shown in
        Table 2.7.1.
            The first column contains the t-values separated by the step size h = 0.2. The third
        column shows the corresponding y-values computed from Euler’s formula (10). In the
        fourth column are the tangent line approximations found from Eq. (7). The second column
        contains values of the solution (12) of the initial value problem (11), correct to five decimal
        places. The solution (12) and the tangent line approximation are also plotted in Figure 2.7.3.
            FromTable 2.7.1 and Figure 2.7.3 we see that the approximations given by Euler’s method for
        this problem are greater than the corresponding values of the actual solution. This is because
the graph of the solution is concave down and therefore the tangent line approximations lie
above the graph.
   The accuracy of the approximations in this example is not good enough to be satisfactory in
a typical scientific or engineering application. For example, at t = 1 the error in the approxi-
mation is 2.32363 − 2.11510 = 0.20853, which is a percentage error of about 9.86% relative to
the exact solution. One way to achieve more accurate results is to use a smaller step size, with
a corresponding increase in the number of computational steps. We explore this possibility in
the next example.
            TABLE 2.7.1 Results of Euler’s Method with h = 0.2 for
            y = 3 − 2t − 0.5y, y(0) = 1
                                           Euler
                t         Exact         with h = 0.2            Tangent line
               0.0       1.00000          1.00000          y = 1 + 2.5t
               0.2       1.43711          1.50000          y = 1.13 + 1.85t
               0.4       1.75650          1.87000          y = 1.364 + 1.265t
               0.6       1.96936          2.12300          y = 1.6799 + 0.7385t
               0.8       2.08584          2.27070          y = 2.05898 + 0.26465t
               1.0       2.11510          2.32363
                  y
                2.4
                             Tangent line approximation
                  2
                                                       Solution
                1.6
                1.2
                              0.2         0.4        0.6        0.8         1   t
            FIGURE 2.7.3 Plots of the solution and a tangent line approximation
       with h = 0.2 for the initial value problem (11): dy/dt = 3 − 2t − 0.5y, y(0) = 1.
   Of course, computations such as those in Example 1 and in the other examples in
this section are usually done on a computer. Some software packages include code
for the Euler method, while others do not. In any case, it is straightforward to write
        a computer program that will carry out the calculations required to produce results
        such as those in Table 2.7.1. Basically, what is required is a loop that will evaluate
        Eq. (10) repetitively, along with suitable instructions for input and output. The output
        can be a list of numbers, as in Table 2.7.1, or a plot, as in Figure 2.7.3. The specific
        instructions can be written in any high-level programming language with which you
        are familiar.
        Consider again the initial value problem (11)
EXAMPLE
                                         dy
   2                                          = 3 − 2t − 0.5y,        y(0) = 1.
                                          dt
        Use Euler’s method with various step sizes to calculate approximate values of the solution
        for 0 ≤ t ≤ 5. Compare the calculated results with the corresponding values of the exact
        solution (12)
                                             y = φ(t) = 14 − 4t − 13e−t/2 .
           We used step sizes h = 0.1, 0.05, 0.025, and 0.01, corresponding respectively to 50, 100, 200,
        and 500 steps, to go from t = 0 to t = 5. The results of these calculations, along with the values
        of the exact solution, are presented in Table 2.7.2. All computed entries are rounded to four
        decimal places, although more digits were retained in the intermediate calculations.
              TABLE 2.7.2 A Comparison of Exact Solution with Euler’s Method for Several
              Step Sizes h for y = 3 − 2t − 0.5y, y(0) = 1
                   t          Exact          h = 0.1         h = 0.05       h = 0.025       h = 0.01
                  0.0        1.0000           1.0000           1.0000           1.0000         1.0000
                  1.0        2.1151           2.2164           2.1651           2.1399         2.1250
                  2.0        1.2176           1.3397           1.2780           1.2476         1.2295
                  3.0      −0.9007         −0.7903           −0.8459          −0.8734        −0.8898
                  4.0      −3.7594         −3.6707           −3.7152          −3.7373        −3.7506
                  5.0      −7.0671         −7.0003           −7.0337          −7.0504        −7.0604
           What conclusions can we draw from the data in Table 2.7.2? The most important observation
        is that, for a fixed value of t, the computed approximate values become more accurate as the
        step size h decreases. You can see this by reading across a particular row in the table from left
        to right. This is what we would expect, of course, but it is encouraging that the data confirm our
        expectations. For example, for t = 2 the approximate value with h = 0.1 is too large by 0.1221
        (about 10%), whereas the value with h = 0.01 is too large by only 0.0119 (about 1%). In this
        case, reducing the step size by a factor of 10 (and performing 10 times as many computations)
        also reduces the error by a factor of about 10. By comparing the errors for other pairs of
        values in the table, you can verify that this relation between step size and error holds for them
        also: reducing the step size by a given factor also reduces the error by approximately the same
        factor. Does this mean that for the Euler method the error is approximately proportional to
        the step size? Of course, one example does not establish such a general result, but it is at least
        an interesting conjecture.18
        18A more detailed discussion of the errors in using the Euler method appears in Chapter 8.
           A second observation from Table 2.7.2 is that, for a fixed step size h, the approximations
        become more accurate as t increases, at least for t > 2. For instance, for h = 0.1 the error for
        t = 5 is only 0.0668, which is a little more than one-half of the error at t = 2. We will return to
        this matter later in this section.
           All in all, Euler’s method seems to work rather well for this problem. Reasonably good
        results are obtained even for a moderately large step size h = 0.1, and the approximation can
        be improved by decreasing h.
            Let us now look at another example.
        Consider the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                           dy
   3                                           = 4 − t + 2y,       y(0) = 1.                           (15)
                                           dt
        The general solution of this differential equation was found in Example 2 of Section 2.1, and
        the solution of the initial value problem (15) is
                                                y = − 74 + 21 t + 11
                                                                  4
                                                                     e2t .                             (16)
        Use Euler’s method with several step sizes to find approximate values of the solution on the
        interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 5. Compare the results with the corresponding values of the solution (16).
            Using the same range of step sizes as in Example 2, we obtain the results presented in
        Table 2.7.3.
        TABLE 2.7.3 A Comparison of Exact Solution with Euler’s Method for Several Step Sizes h
        for y = 4 − t + 2y, y(0) = 1
            t         Exact             h = 0.1           h = 0.05           h = 0.025        h = 0.01
           0.0         1.000000          1.000000             1.000000         1.000000          1.000000
           1.0        19.06990          15.77728           17.25062           18.10997          18.67278
           2.0       149.3949          104.6784           123.7130           135.5440         143.5835
           3.0     1109.179            652.5349           837.0745           959.2580        1045.395
           4.0     8197.884           4042.122           5633.351           6755.175         7575.577
           5.0    60573.53          25026.95            37897.43           47555.35         54881.32
           The data in Table 2.7.3 again confirm our expectation that, for a given value of t, accuracy
        improves as the step size h is reduced. For example, for t = 1 the percentage error diminishes
        from 17.3% when h = 0.1 to 2.1% when h = 0.01. However, the error increases fairly rapidly as
        t increases for a fixed h. Even for h = 0.01, the error at t = 5 is 9.4%, and it is much greater for
        larger step sizes. Of course, the accuracy that is needed depends on the purpose for which the
        results are intended, but the errors in Table 2.7.3 are too large for most scientific or engineering
        applications. To improve the situation, we might either try even smaller step sizes or else restrict
        the computations to a rather short interval away from the initial point. Nevertheless, it is clear
        that Euler’s method is much less effective in this example than in Example 2.
   To understand better what is happening in these examples, let us look again at
Euler’s method for the general initial value problem (1)
                                       dy
                                            = f (t, y),       y(t0 ) = y0 ,
                                       dt
whose solution we denote by φ(t). Recall that a first order differential equation has
an infinite family of solutions, indexed by an arbitrary constant c, and that the initial
condition picks out one member of this infinite family by determining the value of c.
Thus in the infinite family of solutions, φ(t) is the one that satisfies the initial condition
φ(t0 ) = y0 .
   At the first step Euler’s method uses the tangent line approximation to the graph
of y = φ(t) passing through the initial point (t0 , y0 ), and this produces the approx-
imate value y1 at t1 . Usually y1  = φ(t1 ), so at the second step Euler’s method uses
the tangent line approximation not to y = φ(t), but to a nearby solution y = φ1 (t)
that passes through the point (t1 , y1 ). So it is at each subsequent step. Euler’s method
uses a succession of tangent line approximations to a sequence of different solutions
φ(t), φ1 (t), φ2 (t), . . . of the differential equation. At each step the tangent line is con-
structed to the solution passing through the point determined by the result of the
preceding step, as shown in Figure 2.7.4. The quality of the approximation after many
steps depends strongly on the behavior of the set of solutions that pass through the
points (tn , yn ) for n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
                y
                                                                          y = φ 2 (t)
                                                        (t2, y2)
                                 (t1, y1)                                 (t3, y3)
                                                                                      y = φ 1 (t)
                                                                          y = φ (t)
               y0
                            t0           t1             t2             t3                         t
                                   FIGURE 2.7.4 The Euler method.
   In Example 2 the general solution of the differential equation is
                                            y = 14 − 4t + ce−t/2                                    (17)
and the solution of the initial value problem (11) corresponds to c = −13. The family
of solutions (17) is a converging family since the term involving the arbitrary constant
c approaches zero as t → ∞. It does not matter very much which solutions we are
approximating by tangent lines in the implementation of Euler’s method, since all
the solutions are getting closer and closer to each other as t increases.
            On the other hand, in Example 3 the general solution of the differential equation is
                                              y = − 74 + 21 t + ce2t ,                             (18)
         and this is a diverging family. Note that solutions corresponding to two nearby values
         of c become arbitrarily far apart as t increases. In Example 3 we are trying to follow
         the solution for c = 11/4, but in the use of Euler’s method we are actually at each
         step following another solution that separates from the desired one faster and faster
         as t increases. This explains why the errors in Example 3 are so much larger than
         those in Example 2.
            In using a numerical procedure such as the Euler method, you must always keep
         in mind the question of whether the results are accurate enough to be useful. In
         the preceding examples, the accuracy of the numerical results could be determined
         directly by a comparison with the solution obtained analytically. Of course, usually
         the analytical solution is not available if a numerical procedure is to be employed, so
         what we usually need are bounds for, or at least estimates of, the error that do not
         require a knowledge of the exact solution. You should also keep in mind that the best
         that we can expect, or hope for, from a numerical approximation is that it reflects
         the behavior of the actual solution. Thus a member of a diverging family of solutions
         will always be harder to approximate than a member of a converging family.
            If you wish to read more about numerical approximations to solutions of initial
         value problems, you may go directly to Chapter 8 at this point. There we present
         some information on the analysis of errors and also discuss several algorithms that
         are computationally much more efficient than the Euler method.
PROBLEMS Most of the problems in this section call for fairly extensive numerical computations. To han-
         dle these problems you need suitable computing hardware and software. Keep in mind that
         numerical results may vary somewhat, depending on how your program is constructed and on
         how your computer executes arithmetic steps, rounds off, and so forth. Minor variations in the
         last decimal place may be due to such causes and do not necessarily indicate that something is
         amiss. Answers in the back of the book are recorded to six digits in most cases, although more
         digits were retained in the intermediate calculations.
         In each of Problems 1 through 4:
         (a) Find approximate values of the solution of the given initial value problem at t = 0.1, 0.2,
         0.3, and 0.4 using the Euler method with h = 0.1.
         (b) Repeat part (a) with h = 0.05. Compare the results with those found in (a).
         (c) Repeat part (a) with h = 0.025. Compare the results with those found in (a) and (b).
         (d) Find the solution y = φ(t) of the given problem and evaluate φ(t) at t = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and
         0.4. Compare these values with the results of (a), (b), and (c).
           1. y = 3 + t − y,     y(0) = 1                 2. y = 2y − 1,       y(0) = 1
           3. y = 0.5 − t + 2y,     y(0) = 1              4. y = 3 cos t − 2y,      y(0) = 0
         In each of Problems 5 through 10, draw a direction field for the given differential equation
         and state whether you think that the solutions are converging or diverging.
                         √
           5. y = 5 − 3 y                                 6. y = y(3 − ty)
               
           7. y = (4 − ty)/(1 + y )
                                  2
                                                           8. y = −ty + 0.1y3
               
           9. y = t + y
                    2    2
                                                          10. y = (y2 + 2ty)/(3 + t 2 )
In each of Problems 11 through 14, use Euler’s method to find approximate values of the
solution of the given initial value problem at t = 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, and 3:
(a) With h = 0.1.                                     (b) With h = 0.05.
(c) With h = 0.025.                                   (d) With h = 0.01.
               √
11. y = 5 − 3 y,         y(0) = 2                         12. y = y(3 − ty),    y(0) = 0.5
13. y = (4 − ty)/(1 + y2 ),      y(0) = −2                14. y = −ty + 0.1y3 ,    y(0) = 1
15. Consider the initial value problem
                                    y = 3t 2 /(3y2 − 4),      y(1) = 0.
    (a) Use Euler’s method with h = 0.1 to obtain approximate values of the solution at
    t = 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, and 1.8.
    (b) Repeat part (a) with h = 0.05.
    (c) Compare the results of parts (a) and (b). Note that they are reasonably close for
    t = 1.2, 1.4, and 1.6 but are quite different for t = 1.8. Also note (from the differ-
    ential equation)
              √          that the line tangent to the solution is parallel to the y-axis when
    y = ±2/ 3 ∼   = ±1.155. Explain how this might cause such a difference in the calculated
    values.
16. Consider the initial value problem
                                        y  = t 2 + y2 ,   y(0) = 1.
    Use Euler’s method with h = 0.1, 0.05, 0.025, and 0.01 to explore the solution of this
    problem for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. What is your best estimate of the value of the solution at t = 0.8?
    At t = 1? Are your results consistent with the direction field in Problem 9?
17. Consider the initial value problem
                                 y = (y2 + 2ty)/(3 + t 2 ),      y(1) = 2.
    Use Euler’s method with h = 0.1, 0.05, 0.025, and 0.01 to explore the solution of this
    problem for 1 ≤ t ≤ 3. What is your best estimate of the value of the solution at t = 2.5?
    At t = 3? Are your results consistent with the direction field in Problem 10?
18. Consider the initial value problem
                                     y = −ty + 0.1y3 ,       y(0) = α,
    where α is a given number.
    (a) Draw a direction field for the differential equation (or reexamine the one from Prob-
    lem 8). Observe that there is a critical value of α in the interval 2 ≤ α ≤ 3 that separates
    converging solutions from diverging ones. Call this critical value α0 .
    (b) Use Euler’s method with h = 0.01 to estimate α0 . Do this by restricting α0 to an interval
    [a, b], where b − a = 0.01.
19. Consider the initial value problem
                                        y  = y2 − t 2 ,   y(0) = α,
    where α is a given number.
    (a) Draw a direction field for the differential equation. Observe that there is a critical
    value of α in the interval 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 that separates converging solutions from diverging
    ones. Call this critical value α0 .
    (b) Use Euler’s method with h = 0.01 to estimate α0 . Do this by restricting α0 to an interval
    [a, b], where b − a = 0.01.
               20. Convergence of Euler’s Method. It can be shown that under suitable conditions on f ,
                   the numerical approximation generated by the Euler method for the initial value problem
                   y = f (t, y), y(t0 ) = y0 converges to the exact solution as the step size h decreases. This is
                   illustrated by the following example. Consider the initial value problem
                                                     y = 1 − t + y,     y(t0 ) = y0 .
                   (a) Show that the exact solution is y = φ(t) = (y0 − t0 )et−t0 + t.
                   (b) Using the Euler formula, show that
                                            yk = (1 + h)yk−1 + h − htk−1 ,       k = 1, 2, . . . .
                   (c) Noting that y1 = (1 + h)(y0 − t0 ) + t1 , show by induction that
                                                       yn = (1 + h)n (y0 − t0 ) + tn                            (i)
                   for each positive integer n.
                   (d) Consider a fixed point t > t0 and for a given n choose h = (t − t0 )/n. Then tn = t for
                   every n. Note also that h → 0 as n → ∞. By substituting for h in Eq. (i) and letting n → ∞,
                   show that yn → φ(t) as n → ∞.
                   Hint: lim (1 + a/n)n = ea .
                           n→∞
               In each of Problems 21 through 23, use the technique discussed in Problem 20 to show that
               the approximation obtained by the Euler method converges to the exact solution at any fixed
               point as h → 0.
               21. y = y,       y(0) = 1
               22. y = 2y − 1,         y(0) = 1      Hint: y1 = (1 + 2h)/2 + 1/2
                     
               23. y   = 21 − t + 2y,       y(0) = 1      Hint: y1 = (1 + 2h) + t1 /2
2.8 The Existence and Uniqueness Theorem
               In this section we discuss the proof of Theorem 2.4.2, the fundamental existence and
               uniqueness theorem for first order initial value problems. This theorem states that
               under certain conditions on f (t, y), the initial value problem
                                                   y = f (t, y),     y(t0 ) = y0                              (1)
               has a unique solution in some interval containing the point t0 .
                  In some cases (for example, if the differential equation is linear) the existence
               of a solution of the initial value problem (1) can be established directly by actually
               solving the problem and exhibiting a formula for the solution. However, in general,
               this approach is not feasible because there is no method of solving the differential
               equation that applies in all cases. Therefore, for the general case, it is necessary to
               adopt an indirect approach that demonstrates the existence of a solution of Eqs. (1)
              but usually does not provide a practical means of finding it. The heart of this method
              is the construction of a sequence of functions that converges to a limit function sat-
              isfying the initial value problem, although the members of the sequence individually
              do not. As a rule, it is impossible to compute explicitly more than a few members
              of the sequence; therefore, the limit function can be determined only in rare cases.
              Nevertheless, under the restrictions on f (t, y) stated in Theorem 2.4.2, it is possible
              to show that the sequence in question converges and that the limit function has the
              desired properties. The argument is fairly intricate and depends, in part, on techniques
              and results that are usually encountered for the first time in a course on advanced
              calculus. Consequently, we do not go into all the details of the proof here; we do,
              however, indicate its main features and point out some of the difficulties that must
              be overcome.
                 First of all, we note that it is sufficient to consider the problem in which the initial
              point (t0 , y0 ) is the origin; that is, we consider the problem
                                                 y = f (t, y),       y(0) = 0.                       (2)
              If some other initial point is given, then we can always make a preliminary change
              of variables, corresponding to a translation of the coordinate axes, that will take the
              given point (t0 , y0 ) into the origin. The existence and uniqueness theorem can now
              be stated in the following way.
Theorem 2.8.1 If f and ∂f /∂y are continuous in a rectangle R: |t| ≤ a, |y| ≤ b, then there is some
              interval |t| ≤ h ≤ a in which there exists a unique solution y = φ(t) of the initial
              value problem (2).
                 For the method of proof discussed here it is necessary to transform the initial value
              problem (2) into a more convenient form. If we suppose temporarily that there is a
              differentiable function y = φ(t) that satisfies the initial value problem, then f [t, φ(t)]
              is a continuous function of t only. Hence we can integrate y = f (t, y) from the initial
              point t = 0 to an arbitrary value of t, obtaining
                                                             t
                                                    φ(t) =      f [s, φ(s)] ds,                       (3)
                                                             0
              where we have made use of the initial condition φ(0) = 0. We also denote the dummy
              variable of integration by s.
                 Since Eq. (3) contains an integral of the unknown function φ, it is called an integral
              equation. This integral equation is not a formula for the solution of the initial value
              problem, but it does provide another relation satisfied by any solution of Eqs. (2).
              Conversely, suppose that there is a continuous function y = φ(t) that satisfies the
              integral equation (3); then this function also satisfies the initial value problem (2). To
              show this, we first substitute zero for t in Eq. (3), which shows that the initial condition
              is satisfied. Further, since the integrand in Eq. (3) is continuous, it follows from the
              fundamental theorem of calculus that φ is differentiable and that φ (t) = f [t, φ(t)].
              Therefore, the initial value problem and the integral equation are equivalent in the
              sense that any solution of one is also a solution of the other. It is more convenient
to show that there is a unique solution of the integral equation in a certain interval
|t| ≤ h. The same conclusion will then hold also for the initial value problem.
    One method of showing that the integral equation (3) has a unique solution is
known as the method of successive approximations or Picard’s19 iteration method.
In using this method, we start by choosing an initial function φ0 , either arbitrarily or
to approximate in some way the solution of the initial value problem. The simplest
choice is
                                               φ0 (t) = 0;                                           (4)
then φ0 at least satisfies the initial condition in Eqs. (2), although presumably not the
differential equation. The next approximation φ1 is obtained by substituting φ0 (s) for
φ(s) in the right side of Eq. (3) and calling the result of this operation φ1 (t). Thus
                                                 t
                                      φ1 (t) =        f [s, φ0 (s)] ds.                              (5)
                                                  0
Similarly, φ2 is obtained from φ1 :
                                                 t
                                      φ2 (t) =        f [s, φ1 (s)] ds,                              (6)
                                                  0
and, in general,
                                                  t
                                     φn+1 (t) =         f [s, φn (s)] ds.                            (7)
                                                    0
In this manner we generate the sequence of functions {φn } = {φ0 , φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φn , . . .}.
Each member of the sequence satisfies the initial condition, but in general none sat-
isfies the differential equation. However, if at some stage, say, for n = k, we find that
φk+1 (t) = φk (t), then it follows that φk is a solution of the integral equation (3). Hence
φk is also a solution of the initial value problem (2), and the sequence is terminated
at this point. In general, this does not occur, and it is necessary to consider the entire
infinite sequence.
    To establish Theorem 2.8.1, we must answer four principal questions:
1. Do all members of the sequence {φn } exist, or may the process break down at some stage?
2. Does the sequence converge?
3. What are the properties of the limit function? In particular, does it satisfy the integral
     equation (3) and hence the initial value problem (2)?
4. Is this the only solution, or may there be others?
We first show how these questions can be answered in a specific and relatively simple
example and then comment on some of the difficulties that may be encountered in
the general case.
19 Charles-Émile Picard (1856–1914) was appointed professor at the Sorbonne before the age of 30. Except
for Henri Poincaré, he is perhaps the most distinguished French mathematician of his generation. He
is known for important theorems in complex variables and algebraic geometry as well as differential
equations. A special case of the method of successive approximations was first published by Liouville
in 1838. However, the method is usually credited to Picard, who established it in a general and widely
applicable form in a series of papers beginning in 1890.
        Solve the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                              y = 2t(1 + y),             y(0) = 0                                         (8)
   1
        by the method of successive approximations.
           Note first that if y = φ(t), then the corresponding integral equation is
                                                            t
                                                φ(t) =          2s[1 + φ(s)] ds.                                           (9)
                                                            0
        If the initial approximation is φ0 (t) = 0, it follows that
                                                t                            t
                                     φ1 (t) =       2s[1 + φ0 (s)] ds =            2s ds = t 2 .                          (10)
                                                0                             0
        Similarly,
                                         t                           t
                                                                                                       t4
                              φ2 (t) =      2s[1 + φ1 (s)] ds =           2s[1 + s2 ] ds = t 2 +                          (11)
                                         0                            0                                2
        and                    t                           t                     
                                                                                s4                    t4      t6
                     φ3 (t) =     2s[1 + φ2 (s)] ds =          2s 1 + s2 +              ds = t 2 + +             .        (12)
                               0                            0                    2                    2     2·3
        Equations (10), (11), and (12) suggest that
                                                              t4     t6              t 2n
                                            φn (t) = t 2 +         + + ··· +                                              (13)
                                                              2! 3!                  n!
        for each n ≥ 1, and this result can be established by mathematical induction, as follows. Equa-
        tion (13) is certainly true for n = 1; see Eq. (10). We must show that if it is true for n = k, then
        it also holds for n = k + 1. We have
                                                 t
                                    φk+1 (t) =       2s[1 + φk (s)] ds
                                                  0
                                                 t 
                                                                        s4              s2k
                                             =       2s 1 + s2 + + · · · +                    ds
                                                  0                     2!               k!
                                                        t4      t6              t 2k+2
                                             = t2 +         + + ··· +                      ,                              (14)
                                                        2! 3!                (k + 1)!
        and the inductive proof is complete.
           A plot of the first four iterates, φ1 (t), φ2 (t), φ3 (t), and φ4 (t), is shown in Figure 2.8.1. As k
        increases, the iterates seem to remain close over a gradually increasing interval, suggesting
        eventual convergence to a limit function.
           It follows from Eq. (13) that φn (t) is the nth partial sum of the infinite series
                                                             ∞ 2k
                                                                   t
                                                                      ;                                                   (15)
                                                             k=1
                                                                   k!
        hence lim φn (t) exists if and only if the series (15) converges. Applying the ratio test, we see
                n→∞
        that, for each t,             2k+2           
                                      t          k!         t2
                                     
                                      (k + 1)! t 2k  k + 1 → 0
                                                        =                     as k → ∞.                                   (16)
        Thus the series (15) converges for all t, and its sum φ(t) is the limit of the sequence {φn (t)}.
        Further, since the series (15) is a Taylor series, it can be differentiated or integrated term by
        term as long as t remains within the interval of convergence, which in this case is the entire
                                                                                             ∞
        t-axis. Therefore, we can verify by direct computation that φ(t) =                       t 2k /k! is a solution of the
                                                                                             k=1
        integral equation (9). Alternatively, by substituting φ(t) for y in Eqs. (8), we can verify that this
                                                      y                             φ 3(t)
                                                       3
                                                                                φ 2(t)
                                                    2.5               φ4(t)
                                                       2
                                                    1.5
                                                                             φ 1(t)
                                                       1
                                                    0.5
                    –1.5           –1        –0.5                0.5      1         1.5 t
                       FIGURE 2.8.1 Plots of the first four Picard iterates
                   φ1 (t), . . . , φ4 (t) for Example 1: dy/dt = 2t(1 + y), y(0) = 0.
function satisfies the initial value problem. In this example it is also possible, from the series
                                                                                2
(15), to identify φ in terms of elementary functions, namely, φ(t) = et − 1. However, this is not
necessary for the discussion of existence and uniqueness.
   Explicit knowledge of φ(t) does make it possible to visualize the convergence of the sequence
of iterates more clearly by plotting φ(t) − φk (t) for various values of k. Figure 2.8.2 shows
this difference for k = 1, 2, 3, 4. This figure clearly shows the gradually increasing interval
over which successive iterates provide a good approximation to the solution of the initial value
problem.
                                                      y
                                                                                    k=2
                                                      1
                                                                                    k=3
                                                    0.8
                                                                     k=1
                                                    0.6
                                                    0.4
                                                                                   k=4
                                                    0.2
                    –1.5           –1        –0.5               0.5      1         1.5     t
              FIGURE 2.8.2             Plots of φ(t) − φk (t) for Example 1 for k = 1, . . . , 4.
   Finally, to deal with the question of uniqueness, let us suppose that the initial value problem
has two different solutions φ and ψ. Since φ and ψ both satisfy the integral equation (9), we
have by subtraction that
                                                      t
                                     φ(t) − ψ(t) =       2s[φ(s) − ψ(s)] ds.
                                                       0
Taking absolute values of both sides, we have, if t > 0,
                                      t                         t
                                                               
                  |φ(t) − ψ(t)| =        2s[φ(s) − ψ(s)] ds ≤        2s|φ(s) − ψ(s)| ds.
                                        0                              0
If we restrict t to lie in the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ A/2, where A is arbitrary, then 2t ≤ A and
                                             t
                      |φ(t) − ψ(t)| ≤ A          |φ(s) − ψ(s)| ds for 0 ≤ t ≤ A/2.              (17)
                                              0
It is now convenient to introduce the function U defined by
                                                    t
                                        U(t) =         |φ(s) − ψ(s)| ds.                        (18)
                                                     0
Then it follows at once that
                                          U(0) = 0,                                             (19)
                                           U(t) ≥ 0,      for   t ≥ 0.                          (20)
Further, U is differentiable, and U  (t) = |φ(t) − ψ(t)|. Hence, by Eq. (17),
                                U  (t) − AU(t) ≤ 0        for   0 ≤ t ≤ A/2.                   (21)
Multiplying Eq. (21) by the positive quantity e−At gives
                                 [e−At U(t)] ≤ 0        for   0 ≤ t ≤ A/2.                     (22)
Then, upon integrating Eq. (22) from zero to t and using Eq. (19), we obtain
                                    e−At U(t) ≤ 0       for   0 ≤ t ≤ A/2.
Hence U(t) ≤ 0 for 0 ≤ t ≤ A/2. However, since A is arbitrary, we conclude that U(t) ≤ 0 for
all nonnegative t. This result and Eq. (20) are compatible only if U(t) = 0 for each t ≥ 0. Thus
U  (t) = 0 and therefore ψ(t) = φ(t) for all t ≥ 0. This contradicts the hypothesis that φ and ψ
are two different solutions. Consequently, there cannot be two different solutions of the initial
value problem for t ≥ 0. A slight modification of this argument leads to the same conclusion
for t ≤ 0.
    Returning now to the general problem of solving the integral equation (3), let us
consider briefly each of the questions raised earlier:
1.    Do all members of the sequence {φn } exist?
          In the example, f and ∂f /∂y were continuous in the whole ty-plane, and each member
      of the sequence could be explicitly calculated. In contrast, in the general case, f and ∂f /∂y
      are assumed to be continuous only in the rectangle R: |t| ≤ a, |y| ≤ b (see Figure 2.8.3).
      Furthermore, the members of the sequence cannot as a rule be explicitly determined. The
      danger is that at some stage, say, for n = k, the graph of y = φk (t) may contain points
      that lie outside the rectangle R. More precisely, in the computation of φk+1 (t) it would be
      necessary to evaluate f (t, y) at points where it is not known to be continuous or even to
      exist. Thus the calculation of φk+1 (t) might be impossible.
         To avoid this danger, it may be necessary to restrict t to a smaller interval than |t| ≤ a.
      To find such an interval, we make use of the fact that a continuous function on a closed
      bounded region is bounded. Hence f is bounded on R; thus there exists a positive number
      M such that
                                          |f (t, y)| ≤ M,       (t, y) in R.                    (23)
   We have mentioned before that
                                                     φn (0) = 0
                                                   
   for each n. Since f [t, φk (t)] is equal to φk+1    (t), the maximum absolute slope of the graph of
   the equation y = φk+1 (t) is M. Since this graph contains the point (0, 0), it must lie in
   the wedge-shaped shaded region in Figure 2.8.4. Hence the point [t, φk+1 (t)] remains
   in R at least as long as R contains the wedge-shaped region, which is for |t| ≤ b/M. We
   hereafter consider only the rectangle D: |t| ≤ h, |y| ≤ b, where h is equal either to a or to
   b/M, whichever is smaller. With this restriction, all members of the sequence {φn (t)} exist.
   Note that whenever b/M < a, you can try to obtain a larger value of h by finding a better
   (that is, smaller) bound M for |f (t, y)|, if this is possible.
                                                     y
                                      (–a, b)                    (a, b)
                                                            R
                                                                        t
                                     (–a, –b)                   (a, –b)
                   FIGURE 2.8.3          Region of definition for Theorem 2.8.1.
               y = φ n(t) y
                                                             y = φ n(t) y
                                               y=b
                                                                                       y=b
                                             t
                                                                                     t
                                               y = –b
                                                                                       y = –b
                           b          b
            t = –a    t=  M
                                t=M
                                         t=a                 t = –a           t=a
                           (a)                                            (b)
   FIGURE 2.8.4         Regions in which successive iterates lie. (a) b/M < a; (b) b/M > a.
2. Does the sequence {φn (t)} converge?
       We can identify φn (t) = φ1 (t) + [φ2 (t) − φ1 (t)] + · · · + [φn (t) − φn−1 (t)] as the nth par-
   tial sum of the series
                                                  ∞
                                        φ1 (t) +       [φk+1 (t) − φk (t)].                         (24)
                                                  k=1
   The convergence of the sequence {φn (t)} is established by showing that the series (24)
   converges. To do this, it is necessary to estimate the magnitude |φk+1 (t) − φk (t)| of the
   general term. The argument by which this is done is indicated in Problems 15 through
   18 and will be omitted here. Assuming that the sequence converges, we denote the limit
   function by φ, so that
                                               φ(t) = lim φn (t).                                   (25)
                                                         n→∞
3. What are the properties of the limit function φ?
       In the first place, we would like to know that φ is continuous. This is not, however, a
   necessary consequence of the convergence of the sequence {φn (t)}, even though each mem-
   ber of the sequence is itself continuous. Sometimes a sequence of continuous functions
   converges to a limit function that is discontinuous. A simple example of this phenomenon
   is given in Problem 13. One way to show that φ is continuous is to show not only that the
   sequence {φn } converges, but also that it converges in a certain manner, known as uniform
   convergence. We do not take up this matter here but note only that the argument referred
   to in the discussion of question 2 is sufficient to establish the uniform convergence of the
   sequence {φn } and, hence, the continuity of the limit function φ in the interval |t| ≤ h.
       Now let us return to Eq. (7)
                                                   t
                                      φn+1 (t) =        f [s, φn (s)] ds.
                                                    0
   Allowing n to approach ∞ on both sides, we obtain
                                                    t
                                     φ(t) = lim          f [s, φn (s)] ds.                  (26)
                                             n→∞      0
   We would like to interchange the operations of integrating and taking the limit on the
   right side of Eq. (26) so as to obtain
                                              t
                                     φ(t) =       lim f [s, φn (s)] ds.                     (27)
                                               0 n→∞
   In general, such an interchange is not permissible (see Problem 14, for example), but once
   again, the fact that the sequence {φn (t)} converges uniformly is sufficient to allow us to
   take the limiting operation inside the integral sign. Next, we wish to take the limit inside
   the function f , which would give
                                               t
                                     φ(t) =       f [s, lim φn (s)] ds                      (28)
                                               0         n→∞
   and hence
                                                  t
                                        φ(t) =        f [s, φ(s)] ds.                       (29)
                                                  0
   The statement that
                                   lim f [s, φn (s)] = f [s, lim φn (s)]
                                  n→∞                          n→∞
   is equivalent to the statement that f is continuous in its second variable, which is known by
   hypothesis. Hence Eq. (29) is valid, and the function φ satisfies the integral equation (3).
   Thus φ is also a solution of the initial value problem (2).
4. Are there other solutions of the integral equation (3) besides y = φ(t)?
       To show the uniqueness of the solution y = φ(t),we can proceed much as in the example.
   First, assume the existence of another solution y = ψ(t). It is then possible to show (see
   Problem 19) that the difference φ(t) − ψ(t) satisfies the inequality
                                                        t
                               |φ(t) − ψ(t)| ≤ A            |φ(s) − ψ(s)| ds                (30)
                                                         0
   for 0 ≤ t ≤ h and a suitable positive number A. From this point the argument is identical
   to that given in the example, and we conclude that there is no solution of the initial value
   problem (2) other than the one generated by the method of successive approximations.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 and 2, transform the given initial value problem into an equivalent
         problem with the initial point at the origin.
           1. dy/dt = t 2 + y2 ,          y(1) = 2                 2. dy/dt = 1 − y3 ,        y(−1) = 3
         In each of Problems 3 through 6, let φ0 (t) = 0 and define {φn (t)} by the method of succes-
         sive approximations
         (a) Determine φn (t) for an arbitrary value of n.
         (b) Plot φn (t) for n = 1, . . . , 4. Observe whether the iterates appear to be converging.
         (c) Express lim φn (t) = φ(t) in terms of elementary functions; that is, solve the given initial
                        n→∞
         value problem.
         (d) Plot |φ(t) − φn (t)| for n = 1, . . . , 4. For each of φ1 (t), . . . , φ4 (t), estimate the interval in
         which it is a reasonably good approximation to the actual solution.
           3. y = 2(y + 1),           y(0) = 0                    4. y = −y − 1,         y(0) = 0
           5. y = −y/2 + t,            y(0) = 0                   6. y = y + 1 − t,        y(0) = 0
         In each of Problems 7 and 8, let φ0 (t) = 0 and use the method of successive approximations to
         solve the given initial value problem.
         (a) Determine φn (t) for an arbitrary value of n.
         (b) Plot φn (t) for n = 1, . . . , 4. Observe whether the iterates appear to be converging.
         (c) Show that the sequence {φn (t)} converges.
           7. y = ty + 1,         y(0) = 0                        8. y = t 2 y − t,     y(0) = 0
         In each of Problems 9 and 10, let φ0 (t) = 0 and use the method of successive approximations
         to approximate the solution of the given initial value problem.
         (a) Calculate φ1 (t), . . . , φ3 (t).
         (b) Plot φ1 (t), . . . , φ3 (t) and observe whether the iterates appear to be converging.
           9. y = t 2 + y2 ,        y(0) = 0                     10. y = 1 − y3 ,      y(0) = 0
         In each of Problems 11 and 12, let φ0 (t) = 0 and use the method of successive approximations
         to approximate the solution of the given initial value problem.
         (a) Calculate φ1 (t), . . . , φ4 (t), or (if necessary) Taylor approximations to these iterates. Keep
         terms up to order six.
         (b) Plot the functions you found in part (a) and observe whether they appear to be converging.
         11. y = − sin y + 1,            y(0) = 0               12. y = (3t 2 + 4t + 2)/2(y − 1),       y(0) = 0
         13. Let φn (x) = xn for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and show that
                                                                 
                                                                   0,   0 ≤ x < 1,
                                                   lim φn (x) =
                                                  n→∞              1,        x = 1.
              This example shows that a sequence of continuous functions may converge to a limit
              function that is discontinuous.
                                                               2
         14. Consider the sequence φn (x) = 2nxe−nx , 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.
              (a) Show that lim φn (x) = 0 for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1; hence
                                  n→∞
                                                         1
                                                             lim φn (x) dx = 0.
                                                         0  n→∞
                        1
                                      2
     (b) Show that         2nxe−nx dx = 1 − e−n ; hence
                        0
                                                         1
                                                   lim       φn (x) dx = 1.
                                                  n→∞    0
    Thus, in this example,
                                              b                   b
                                       lim         φn (x) dx  =       lim φn (x) dx,
                                      n→∞      a                    a n→∞
     even though lim φn (x) exists and is continuous.
                     n→∞
In Problems 15 through 18, we indicate how to prove that the sequence {φn (t)}, defined by
Eqs. (4) through (7), converges.
15. If ∂f /∂y is continuous in the rectangle D, show that there is a positive constant K such that
                                          |f (t, y1 ) − f (t, y2 )| ≤ K|y1 − y2 |,                     (i)
     where (t, y1 ) and (t, y2 ) are any two points in D having the same t coordinate.This inequality
     is known as a Lipschitz20 condition.
     Hint: Hold t fixed and use the mean value theorem on f as a function of y only. Choose K
     to be the maximum value of |∂f /∂y| in D.
16. If φn−1 (t) and φn (t) are members of the sequence {φn (t)}, use the result of Problem 15 to
     show that
                               |f [t, φn (t)] − f [t, φn−1 (t)]| ≤ K|φn (t) − φn−1 (t)|.
17. (a) Show that if |t| ≤ h, then
                                                       |φ1 (t)| ≤ M|t|,
     where M is chosen so that |f (t, y)| ≤ M for (t, y) in D.
     (b) Use the results of Problem 16 and part (a) of Problem 17 to show that
                                                                      MK|t|2
                                              |φ2 (t) − φ1 (t)| ≤             .
                                                                         2
     (c) Show, by mathematical induction, that
                                                             MK n−1 |t|n     MK n−1 hn
                                 |φn (t) − φn−1 (t)| ≤                     ≤            .
                                                                  n!             n!
18. Note that
                          φn (t) = φ1 (t) + [φ2 (t) − φ1 (t)] + · · · + [φn (t) − φn−1 (t)].
     (a) Show that
                        |φn (t)| ≤ |φ1 (t)| + |φ2 (t) − φ1 (t)| + · · · + |φn (t) − φn−1 (t)|.
     (b) Use the results of Problem 17 to show that
                                                                                     
                                               M              (Kh)2             (Kh)n
                                 |φn (t)| ≤            Kh +           + ··· +           .
                                                K                2!               n!
     (c) Show that the sum in part (b) converges as n → ∞ and, hence, the sum in part (a)
     also converges as n → ∞. Conclude therefore that the sequence {φn (t)} converges since
     it is the sequence of partial sums of a convergent infinite series.
20The German mathematician Rudolf Lipschitz (1832–1903), professor at the University of Bonn for many
years, worked in several areas of mathematics. The inequality (i) can replace the hypothesis that ∂f /∂y is
continuous in Theorem 2.8.1; this results in a slightly stronger theorem.
                19. In this problem we deal with the question of uniqueness of the solution of the integral
                    equation (3)
                                                                 t
                                                       φ(t) =        f [s, φ(s)] ds.
                                                                  0
                    (a) Suppose that φ and ψ are two solutions of Eq. (3). Show that, for t ≥ 0,
                                                             t
                                            φ(t) − ψ(t) =       {f [s, φ(s)] − f [s, ψ(s)]} ds.
                                                             0
                    (b) Show that
                                                              t
                                           |φ(t) − ψ(t)| ≤       |f [s, φ(s)] − f [s, ψ(s)]| ds.
                                                              0
                    (c) Use the result of Problem 15 to show that
                                                                      t
                                               |φ(t) − ψ(t)| ≤ K          |φ(s) − ψ(s)| ds,
                                                                       0
                    where K is an upper bound for |∂f /∂y| in D. This is the same as Eq. (30), and the rest of
                    the proof may be constructed as indicated in the text.
2.9 First Order Difference Equations
                Although a continuous model leading to a differential equation is reasonable and
                attractive for many problems, there are some cases in which a discrete model may
                be more natural. For instance, the continuous model of compound interest used in
                Section 2.3 is only an approximation to the actual discrete process. Similarly, some-
                times population growth may be described more accurately by a discrete than by
                a continuous model. This is true, for example, of species whose generations do not
                overlap and that propagate at regular intervals, such as at particular times of the cal-
                endar year. Then the population yn+1 of the species in the year n + 1 is some function
                of n and the population yn in the preceding year; that is,
                                           yn+1 = f (n, yn ),           n = 0, 1, 2, . . . .              (1)
                Equation (1) is called a first order difference equation. It is first order because the
                value of yn+1 depends on the value of yn but not on earlier values yn−1 , yn−2 , and so
                forth. As for differential equations, the difference equation (1) is linear if f is a linear
                function of yn ; otherwise, it is nonlinear. A solution of the difference equation (1) is
                a sequence of numbers y0 , y1 , y2 , . . . that satisfy the equation for each n. In addition
                to the difference equation itself, there may also be an initial condition
                                                              y0 = α                                      (2)
                that prescribes the value of the first term of the solution sequence.
                  We now assume temporarily that the function f in Eq. (1) depends only on yn , but
                not on n. In this case
                                             yn+1 = f ( yn ),         n = 0, 1, 2, . . . .                (3)
If y0 is given, then successive terms of the solution can be found from Eq. (3). Thus
                                          y1 = f ( y0 ),
and
                                   y2 = f (y1 ) = f [f (y0 )].
The quantity f [f (y0 )] is called the second iterate of the difference equation and is
sometimes denoted by f 2 (y0 ). Similarly, the third iterate y3 is given by
                             y3 = f (y2 ) = f { f [f (y0 )]} = f 3 (y0 ),
and so on. In general, the nth iterate yn is
                                   yn = f ( yn−1 ) = f n (y0 ).
This procedure is referred to as iterating the difference equation. It is often of pri-
mary interest to determine the behavior of yn as n → ∞. In particular, does yn
approach a limit, and if so, what is it?
   Solutions for which yn has the same value for all n are called equilibrium solutions.
They are frequently of special importance,just as in the study of differential equations.
If equilibrium solutions exist, you can find them by setting yn+1 equal to yn in Eq. (3)
and solving the resulting equation
                                           yn = f (yn )                                  (4)
for yn .
Linear Equations. Suppose that the population of a certain species in a given region in
year n + 1, denoted by yn+1 , is a positive multiple ρn of the population yn in year n;
that is,
                              yn+1 = ρn yn ,        n = 0, 1, 2, . . . .                 (5)
Note that the reproduction rate ρn may differ from year to year. The difference
equation (5) is linear and can easily be solved by iteration. We obtain
                                     y1 = ρ0 y0 ,
                                     y2 = ρ1 y1 = ρ1 ρ0 y0 ,
and, in general,
                            yn = ρn−1 · · · ρ0 y0 ,       n = 1, 2, . . . .              (6)
Thus, if the initial population y0 is given, then the population of each succeeding
generation is determined by Eq. (6). Although for a population problem ρn is intrin-
sically positive, the solution (6) is also valid if ρn is negative for some or all values of
n. Note, however, that if ρn is zero for some n, then yn+1 and all succeeding values of
y are zero; in other words, the species has become extinct.
   If the reproduction rate ρn has the same value ρ for each n, then the difference
equation (5) becomes
                                          yn+1 = ρyn                                     (7)
and its solution is
                                           yn = ρn y0 .                                  (8)
Equation (7) also has an equilibrium solution, namely, yn = 0 for all n, corresponding
to the initial value y0 = 0. The limiting behavior of yn is easy to determine from
Eq. (8). In fact,                   ⎧
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎨0,                  if |ρ| < 1;
                          lim yn = y0 ,                  if ρ = 1;                         (9)
                         n→∞        ⎪
                                    ⎩
                                       does not exist, otherwise.
In other words, the equilibrium solution yn = 0 is asymptotically stable for |ρ| < 1
and unstable for |ρ| > 1.
   Now we will modify the population model represented by Eq. (5) to include the
effect of immigration or emigration. If bn is the net increase in population in year
n due to immigration, then the population in year n + 1 is the sum of the part of
the population resulting from natural reproduction and the part due to immigration.
Thus
                            yn+1 = ρyn + bn ,        n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,                 (10)
where we are now assuming that the reproduction rate ρ is constant. We can solve
Eq. (10) by iteration in the same manner as before. We have
                                               y1 = ρy0 + b0 ,
                         y2 = ρ(ρy0 + b0 ) + b1 = ρ2 y0 + ρb0 + b1 ,
                 y3 = ρ(ρ2 y0 + ρb0 + b1 ) + b2 = ρ3 y0 + ρ2 b0 + ρb1 + b2 ,
and so forth. In general, we obtain
                                                                          
                                                                          n−1
             yn = ρn y0 + ρn−1 b0 + · · · + ρbn−2 + bn−1 = ρn y0 +            ρn−1−j bj . (11)
                                                                          j=0
Note that the first term on the right side of Eq. (11) represents the descendants of
the original population, while the other terms represent the population in year n
resulting from immigration in all preceding years.
   In the special case where bn = b  = 0 for all n, the difference equation is
                                        yn+1 = ρyn + b,                                   (12)
and from Eq. (11) its solution is
                          yn = ρn y0 + (1 + ρ + ρ2 + · · · + ρn−1 )b.                     (13)
If ρ  = 1, we can write this solution in the more compact form
                                                   1 − ρn
                                   yn = ρn y0 +           b,                              (14)
                                                   1−ρ
where again the two terms on the right side are the effects of the original population
and of immigration, respectively. Rewriting Eq. (14) as
                                         
                                                  b           b
                               yn = ρ y0 −
                                      n
                                                        +                                 (15)
                                               1−ρ         1−ρ
makes the long-time behavior of yn more evident. It follows from Eq. (15) that
yn → b/(1 − ρ) if |ρ| < 1. If |ρ| > 1 or if ρ = −1 then yn has no limit unless
y0 = b/(1 − ρ). The quantity b/(1 − ρ), for ρ  = 1, is an equilibrium solution of
        Eq. (12), as can readily be seen directly from that equation. Of course, Eq. (14)
        is not valid for ρ = 1. To deal with that case, we must return to Eq. (13) and let ρ = 1
        there. It follows that
                                                  yn = y0 + nb,                                    (16)
        so in this case yn becomes unbounded as n → ∞.
           The same model also provides a framework for solving many problems of a finan-
        cial character. For such problems, yn is the account balance in the nth time period,
        ρn = 1 + rn , where rn is the interest rate for that period, and bn is the amount
        deposited or withdrawn. The following example is typical.
        A recent college graduate takes out a $10,000 loan to purchase a car. If the interest rate is
EXAMPLE 12%, what monthly payment is required to pay off the loan in 4 years?
   1       The relevant difference equation is Eq. (12), where yn is the loan balance outstanding in the
        nth month, ρ = 1 + r, where r is the interest rate per month and b is the effect of the monthly
        payment. Note that ρ = 1.01, corresponding to a monthly interest rate of 1%. Since payments
        reduce the loan balance, b must be negative; the actual payment is |b|.
           The solution of the difference equation (12) with this value for ρ and the initial condition
        y0 = 10,000 is given by Eq. (15); that is,
                                     yn = (1.01)n (10,000 + 100b) − 100b.                           (17)
        The value of b needed to pay off the loan in 4 years is found by setting y48 = 0 and solving
        for b. This gives
                                                     (1.01)48
                                      b = −100                  = −263.34.                          (18)
                                                   (1.01)48 − 1
        The total amount paid on the loan is 48 times |b|, or $12,640.32. Of this amount, $10,000 is
        repayment of the principal and the remaining $2640.32 is interest.
        Nonlinear Equations. Nonlinear difference equations are much more complicated and
        have much more varied solutions than linear equations. We will restrict our attention
        to a single equation, the logistic difference equation
                                                                 yn
                                            yn+1 = ρyn 1 −          ,                              (19)
                                                                 k
        which is analogous to the logistic differential equation
                                               dy               y
                                                    = ry 1 −                                       (20)
                                               dt               K
        that was discussed in Section 2.5. Note that if the derivative dy/dt in Eq. (20) is
        replaced by the difference (yn+1 − yn )/h, then Eq. (20) reduces to Eq. (19) with
        ρ = 1 + hr and k = (1 + hr)K/hr. To simplify Eq. (19) a little more, we can scale the
        variable yn by introducing the new variable un = yn /k. Then Eq. (19) becomes
                                             un+1 = ρun (1 − un ),                                 (21)
        where ρ is a positive parameter.
   We begin our investigation of Eq. (21) by seeking the equilibrium, or constant, solu-
tions. These can be found by setting un+1 equal to un in Eq. (21), which corresponds
to setting dy/dt equal to zero in Eq. (20). The resulting equation is
                                     un = ρun − ρu2n ,                              (22)
so it follows that the equilibrium solutions of Eq. (21) are
                                                    ρ−1
                                 un = 0,      un =         .                        (23)
                                                     ρ
   The next question is whether the equilibrium solutions are asymptotically stable or
unstable. That is, for an initial condition near one of the equilibrium solutions, does
the resulting solution sequence approach or depart from the equilibrium solution?
One way to examine this question is by approximating Eq. (21) by a linear equation
in the neighborhood of an equilibrium solution. For example, near the equilibrium
solution un = 0, the quantity u2n is small compared to un itself, so we assume that we
can neglect the quadratic term in Eq. (21) in comparison with the linear terms. This
leaves us with the linear difference equation
                                        un+1 = ρun ,                                (24)
which is presumably a good approximation to Eq. (21) for un sufficiently near zero.
However, Eq. (24) is the same as Eq. (7), and we have already concluded, in Eq. (9),
that un → 0 as n → ∞ if and only if |ρ| < 1, or (since ρ must be positive) for
0 < ρ < 1. Thus the equilibrium solution un = 0 is asymptotically stable for the linear
approximation (24) for this set of ρ values, so we conclude that it is also asymptoti-
cally stable for the full nonlinear equation (21). This conclusion is correct, although
our argument is not complete. What is lacking is a theorem stating that the solutions
of the nonlinear equation (21) resemble those of the linear equation (24) near the
equilibrium solution un = 0. We will not take time to discuss this issue here; the same
question is treated for differential equations in Section 9.3.
   Now consider the other equilibrium solution un = (ρ − 1)/ρ. To study solutions in
the neighborhood of this point, we write
                                           ρ−1
                                     un =        + vn ,                             (25)
                                             ρ
where we assume that vn is small. By substituting from Eq. (25) in Eq. (21) and
simplifying the resulting equation, we eventually obtain
                                  vn+1 = (2 − ρ)vn − ρv2n .                         (26)
Since vn is small, we again neglect the quadratic term in comparison with the linear
terms and thereby obtain the linear equation
                                     vn+1 = (2 − ρ)vn .                             (27)
Referring to Eq. (9) once more, we find that vn → 0 as n → ∞ for |2 − ρ| < 1, or in
other words for 1 < ρ < 3. Therefore, we conclude that for this range of values of ρ,
the equilibrium solution un = (ρ − 1)/ρ is asymptotically stable.
   Figure 2.9.1 contains the graphs of solutions of Eq. (21) for ρ = 0.8, ρ = 1.5,
and ρ = 2.8, respectively. Observe that the solution converges to zero for ρ = 0.8
             and to the nonzero equilibrium solution for ρ = 1.5 and ρ = 2.8. The convergence is
             monotone for ρ = 0.8 and ρ = 1.5 and is oscillatory for ρ = 2.8. The graphs shown
             are for particular initial conditions, but the graphs for other initial conditions are
             similar.
un                            un                                         un
                                                                                                  1.8 ~
.8                           0.8                                        0.8                un =       = 0.6429
                                                                                                  2.8
.6                           0.6                1                       0.6
                                          un = 3
.4                           0.4                                        0.4
.2                           0.2                                        0.2
   2  4      6      8    n              2     4        6       8    n             2       4          6      8  n
        ( a)                                      ( b)                                       ( c)
     FIGURE 2.9.1      Solutions of un+1 = ρun (1 − un ): (a) ρ = 0.8; (b) ρ = 1.5; (c) ρ = 2.8.
               Another way of displaying the solution of a difference equation is shown in
             Figure 2.9.2. In each part of this figure, the graphs of the parabola y = ρx(1 − x)
             and of the straight line y = x are shown. The equilibrium solutions correspond to
             the points of intersection of these two curves. The piecewise linear graph consist-
             ing of successive vertical and horizontal line segments, sometimes called a stairstep
             diagram, represents the solution sequence. The sequence starts at the point u0 on
             the x-axis. The vertical line segment drawn upward to the parabola at u0 corresponds
             to the calculation of ρu0 (1 − u0 ) = u1 . This value is then transferred from the y-axis to
             the x-axis; this step is represented by the horizontal line segment from the parabola
             to the line y = x. Then the process is repeated over and over again. Clearly, the
             sequence converges to the origin in Figure 2.9.2a and to the nonzero equilibrium
             solution in the other two cases.
                To summarize our results so far: the difference equation (21) has two equilib-
             rium solutions, un = 0 and un = (ρ − 1)/ρ; the former is asymptotically stable for
             0 ≤ ρ < 1, and the latter is asymptotically stable for 1 < ρ < 3. When ρ = 1, the two
             equilibrium solutions coincide at u = 0; this solution can be shown to be asymptoti-
             cally stable. In Figure 2.9.3 the parameter ρ is plotted on the horizontal axis and u on
             the vertical axis. The equilibrium solutions u = 0 and u = (ρ − 1)/ρ are shown. The
             intervals in which each one is asymptotically stable are indicated by the solid portions
             of the curves. There is an exchange of stability from one equilibrium solution to the
             other at ρ = 1.
                For ρ > 3, neither of the equilibrium solutions is stable, and the solutions of
             Eq. (21) exhibit increasing complexity as ρ increases. For ρ somewhat greater than 3,
             the sequence un rapidly approaches a steady oscillation of period 2; that is, un oscil-
             lates back and forth between two distinct values. For ρ = 3.2, a solution is shown in
             Figure 2.9.4. For n greater than about 20, the solution alternates between the values
             0.5130 and 0.7995. The graph is drawn for the particular initial condition u0 = 0.3,
             but it is similar for all other initial values between 0 and 1. Figure 2.9.4b also shows
             the same steady oscillation as a rectangular path that is traversed repeatedly in the
             clockwise direction.
 y                                                       y
0.8                                                    0.8
                                   y=x                                                           y=x
0.6                                                    0.6
0.4                                                    0.4                                  y = ρ x (1 – x)
                                                                             1, 1
                         y = ρ x (1 – x)                                     3 3
0.2                                                    0.2
           u0 = 0.3                                                                         u0 = 0.85
    0.2     0.4         0.6        0.8          1x                 0.2        0.4       0.6        0.8      1 x
                 ( a)                                                                 ( b)
                      y
                      1
                                                                      y=x
                    0.8
                               y = ρ x (1 – x)
                                                           (0.6429..., 0.6429...)
                    0.6
                    0.4
                    0.2
                                           u0 = 0.3
                                  0.2        0.4       0.6     0.8        1       x
                                                    ( c)
        FIGURE 2.9.2     Iterates of un+1 = ρun (1 − un ): (a) ρ = 0.8; (b) ρ = 1.5; (c) ρ = 2.8.
                             u
                              1
                                                                 u = (ρ – 1)/ρ
                            0.5
                                   Asymptotically stable
                                   u=0
                                                  1                2                3               ρ
                                                             Unstable
                          –0.5
                              FIGURE 2.9.3       Exchange of stability for un+1 = ρun (1 − un ).
         un
                                                                             0.7995
        0.8
        0.6
                                                                             0.5130
        0.4
        0.2
                             10                 20                 30               40 n
                                                   (a)
                 y
                  1
               0.8                                                      0.7995
                          y = ρ x (1 – x)
               0.6
                                                                        0.5130
               0.4                              0.5130         0.7995
                                          y=x
               0.2
                               0.2          0.4        0.6         0.8          1 x
                                                  (b)
                     FIGURE 2.9.4 A solution of un+1 = ρun (1 − un ) for
                        ρ = 3.2; period 2. (a) un versus n; (b) a two-cycle.
   At about ρ = 3.449, each state in the oscillation of period 2 separates into two
distinct states, and the solution becomes periodic with period 4; see Figure 2.9.5, which
shows a solution of period 4 for ρ = 3.5. As ρ increases further, periodic solutions
of period 8, 16, . . . appear. The appearance of a new solution at a certain parameter
value is called a bifurcation.
   The ρ-values at which the successive period doublings occur approach a limit that
is approximately 3.57. For ρ > 3.57, the solutions possess some regularity but no
discernible detailed pattern for most values of ρ. For example, a solution for ρ = 3.65
is shown in Figure 2.9.6. It oscillates between approximately 0.3 and 0.9, but its fine
structure is unpredictable. The term chaotic is used to describe this situation. One of
the features of chaotic solutions is extreme sensitivity to the initial conditions. This
is illustrated in Figure 2.9.7, where two solutions of Eq. (21) for ρ = 3.65 are shown.
One solution is the same as that in Figure 2.9.6 and has the initial value u0 = 0.3, while
the other solution has the initial value u0 = 0.305. For about 15 iterations the two
solutions remain close and are hard to distinguish from each other in the figure. After
that, although they continue to wander about in approximately the same set of values,
       un
       0.8
       0.4
               4     8     12    16   20 24     28    32     36  40  n
                                         (a)
            y
             1
                                                         y=x
               y = ρ x (1 – x)
           0.5
                                  0.5009     0.8269
                            0.3828               0.8750
                                    0.5                    1      x
                                         (b)
       FIGURE 2.9.5 A solution of un+1 = ρun (1 − un ) for ρ = 3.5;
                 period 4. (a) un versus n; (b) a four-cycle.
          un
          0.9
          0.8
          0.7
          0.6
          0.5
          0.4
          0.3
                     10        20       30     40       50      60 n
FIGURE 2.9.6 A solution of un+1 = ρun (1 − un ) for ρ = 3.65; a chaotic solution.
                       un
                       0.9
                       0.8
                       0.7
                       0.6
                       0.5
                       0.4
                       0.3
                                     10          20          30          40           50         60 n
         FIGURE 2.9.7 Two solutions of un+1 = ρun (1 − un ) for ρ = 3.65; u0 = 0.3 and u0 = 0.305.
         their graphs are quite dissimilar. It would certainly not be possible to use one of these
         solutions to estimate the value of the other for values of n larger than about 15.
             It is only comparatively recently that chaotic solutions of difference and differential
         equations have become widely known. Equation (20) was one of the first instances of
         mathematical chaos to be found and studied in detail, by Robert May21 in 1974. On
         the basis of his analysis of this equation as a model of the population of certain insect
         species, May suggested that if the growth rate ρ is too large, then it will be impossible
         to make effective long-range predictions about these insect populations. The occur-
         rence of chaotic solutions in seemingly simple problems has stimulated an enormous
         amount of research, but many questions remain unanswered. It is increasingly clear,
         however, that chaotic solutions are much more common than was suspected at first
         and that they may be a part of the investigation of a wide range of phenomena.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, solve the given difference equation in terms of the initial
         value y0 . Describe the behavior of the solution as n → ∞.
                                                                            n+1
           1. yn+1 = −0.9yn                                     2. yn+1 =          yn
                                                                            n+2
                       
                          n+3
           3. yn+1 =           yn                               4. yn+1 = (−1)n+1 yn
                          n+1
           5. yn+1 = 0.5yn + 6                                  6. yn+1 = −0.5yn + 6
         21 Robert M. May (1938– ) was born in Sydney, Australia, and received his education at the University of
         Sydney with a doctorate in theoretical physics in 1959. His interests soon turned to population dynamics
         and theoretical ecology; the work cited in the text is described in two papers listed in the References at
         the end of this chapter. He has held professorships at Sydney, at Princeton, at Imperial College (London),
         and (since 1988) at Oxford.
 7. Find the effective annual yield of a bank account that pays interest at a rate of 7%,
    compounded daily; that is, divide the difference between the final and initial balances by
    the initial balance.
 8. An investor deposits $1000 in an account paying interest at a rate of 8%, compounded
    monthly, and also makes additional deposits of $25 per month. Find the balance in the
    account after 3 years.
 9. A certain college graduate borrows $8000 to buy a car. The lender charges interest at an
    annual rate of 10%. What monthly payment rate is required to pay off the loan in 3 years?
    Compare your result with that of Problem 9 in Section 2.3.
10. A homebuyer wishes to take out a mortgage of $100,000 for a 30-year period.What monthly
    payment is required if the interest rate is (a) 9%, (b) 10%, (c) 12%?
11. A homebuyer takes out a mortgage of $100,000 with an interest rate of 9%. What monthly
    payment is required to pay off the loan in 30 years? In 20 years? What is the total amount
    paid during the term of the loan in each of these cases?
12. If the interest rate on a 20-year mortgage is fixed at 10% and if a monthly payment of
    $1000 is the maximum that the buyer can afford, what is the maximum mortgage loan that
    can be made under these conditions?
13. A homebuyer wishes to finance the purchase with a $95,000 mortgage with a 20-year term.
    What is the maximum interest rate the buyer can afford if the monthly payment is not to
    exceed $900?
The Logistic Difference Equation. Problems 14 through 19 deal with the difference equation
(21), un+1 = ρun (1 − un ).
14. Carry out the details in the linear stability analysis of the equilibrium solution
    un = (ρ − 1)/ρ. That is, derive the difference equation (26) in the text for the pertur-
    bation vn .
15. (a) For ρ = 3.2, plot or calculate the solution of the logistic equation (21) for several
    initial conditions, say, u0 = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8. Observe that in each case the solution
    approaches a steady oscillation between the same two values. This illustrates that the
    long-term behavior of the solution is independent of the initial conditions.
    (b) Make similar calculations and verify that the nature of the solution for large n is
    independent of the initial condition for other values of ρ, such as 2.6, 2.8, and 3.4.
16. Assume that ρ > 1 in Eq. (21).
    (a) Draw a qualitatively correct stairstep diagram and thereby show that if u0 < 0, then
    un → −∞ as n → ∞.
    (b) In a similar way, determine what happens as n → ∞ if u0 > 1.
17. The solutions of Eq. (21) change from convergent sequences to periodic oscillations of
    period 2 as the parameter ρ passes through the value 3. To see more clearly how this
    happens, carry out the following calculations.
    (a) Plot or calculate the solution for ρ = 2.9, 2.95, and 2.99, respectively, using an initial
    value u0 of your choice in the interval (0, 1). In each case estimate how many iterations
    are required for the solution to get “very close” to the limiting value. Use any convenient
    interpretation of what “very close” means in the preceding sentence.
    (b) Plot or calculate the solution for ρ = 3.01, 3.05, and 3.1, respectively, using the same
    initial condition as in part (a). In each case estimate how many iterations are needed to
    reach a steady-state oscillation. Also find or estimate the two values in the steady-state
    oscillation.
         18. By calculating or plotting the solution of Eq. (21) for different values of ρ, estimate the
              value of ρ at which the solution changes from an oscillation of period 2 to one of period
              4. In the same way, estimate the value of ρ at which the solution changes from period 4 to
              period 8.
         19. Let ρk be the value of ρ at which the solution of Eq. (21) changes from period 2k−1 to
              period 2k . Thus, as noted in the text, ρ1 = 3, ρ2 ∼  = 3.449, and ρ3 ∼  = 3.544.
              (a) Using these values of ρ1 , ρ2 , and ρ3 , or those you found in Problem 18, calculate
              (ρ2 − ρ1 )/(ρ3 − ρ2 ).
              (b) Let δn = (ρn − ρn−1)/(ρn+1 − ρn). It can be shown that δn approaches a limit δ as n → ∞,
              where δ ∼  = 4.6692 is known as the Feigenbaum22 number. Determine the percentage
              difference between the limiting value δ and δ2 , as calculated in part (a).
              (c) Assume that δ3 = δ and use this relation to estimate ρ4 ,the value of ρ at which solutions
              of period 16 appear.
              (d) By plotting or calculating solutions near the value of ρ4 found in part (c), try to detect
              the appearance of a period 16 solution.
              (e) Observe that
                                     ρn = ρ1 + (ρ2 − ρ1 ) + (ρ3 − ρ2 ) + · · · + (ρn − ρn−1 ).
              Assuming that (ρ4 − ρ3 ) = (ρ3 − ρ2 )δ−1 , (ρ5 − ρ4 ) = (ρ3 − ρ2 )δ−2 , and so forth, express ρn
              as a geometric sum. Then find the limit of ρn as n → ∞. This is an estimate of the value of
              ρ at which the onset of chaos occurs in the solution of the logistic equation (21).
PROBLEMS Miscellaneous Problems. One of the difficulties in solving first order equations is that there
         are several methods of solution, each of which can be used on a certain type of equation. It
         may take some time to become proficient in matching solution methods with equations. The
         first 32 of the following problems are presented to give you some practice in identifying the
         method or methods applicable to a given equation. The remaining problems involve certain
         types of equations that can be solved by specialized methods.
         In each of Problems 1 through 32, solve the given differential equation. If an initial condition
         is given, also find the solution that satisfies it.
              dy      x3 − 2y                                       dy     1 + cos x
           1.      =                                            2.      =
              dx          x                                         dx     2 − sin y
              dy         2x + y                                     dy
           3.      =                ,       y(0) = 0             4.     = 3 − 6x + y − 2xy
              dx      3 + 3y2 − x                                   dx
              dy        2xy + y2 + 1                                 dy
           5.      =− 2                                         6. x     + xy = 1 − y,        y(1) = 0
              dx           x + 2xy                                   dx
              dy       4x3 + 1                                       dy           sin x
           7.      =                                            8. x    + 2y =          ,    y(2) = 1
              dx      y(2 + 3y)                                      dx             x
         22This result for the logistic difference equation was discovered in August 1975 by Mitchell Feigenbaum
         (1944– ), while he was working at the Los Alamos National Laboratory. Within a few weeks he had estab-
         lished that the same limiting value also appears in a large class of period-doubling difference equations.
         Feigenbaum, who has a doctorate in physics from M.I.T., is now at Rockefeller University.
      dy       2xy + 1                                                                      dy
  9.      =− 2                                        10. (x2 y + xy − y) + (x2 y − 2x2 )       =0
      dx       x + 2y                                                                       dx
                            dy                             dy              1
11. (x2 + y) + (x + ey )        =0                    12.      +y=
                            dx                             dx           1 + ex
      dy                                                                         dy
13.       = 1 + 2x + y2 + 2xy2                        14. (x + y) + (x + 2y)         = 0,     y(2) = 3
      dx                                                                         dx
               dy                                          dy        e−x cos y − e2y cos x
15. (ex + 1)       = y − yex                          16.      =
               dx                                          dx      −e−x sin y + 2e2y sin x
      dy                                                   dy                 2
17.       = e2x + 3y                                  18.      + 2y = e−x −2x ,        y(0) = 3
      dx                                                   dx
      dy     3x2 − 2y − y3
19.       =                                           20. y = ex+y
      dx       2x + 3xy2
      dy      2y2 + 6xy − 4                                dy      x2 − 1
21.       + 2                   =0                    22.      = 2          ,     y(−1) = 1
      dx 3x + 4xy + 3y2                                    dx       y +1
       dy                                                                                    dy
23. t      + (t + 1)y = e2t                           24. 2 sin y sin x cos x + cos y sin2 x     =0
       dt                                                                                    dx
                           
         x        y               x      x2    dy
25. 2 − 2                 +            −            =0
         y x + y2             x 2 + y2   y2    dx
                                                           dy          x
26. xy = y + xey/x                                   27.      = 2              Hint: Let u = x2 .
                                                           dx      x y + y3
                         dy                                dy      x+y
28. (2y + 3x) = −x                                    29.      =
                         dx                                dx      x−y
                                   dy                      dy         3x2 y + y2
30. (3y2 + 2xy) − (2xy + x2 )          =0             31.      =− 3              ,     y(1) = −2
                                   dx                      dx         2x + 3xy
32. xy + y − y2 e2x = 0,         y(1) = 2
33. Riccati Equations. The equation
                                        dy
                                            = q1 (t) + q2 (t)y + q3 (t)y2
                                        dt
     is known as a Riccati23 equation. Suppose that some particular solution y1 of this equation
     is known. A more general solution containing one arbitrary constant can be obtained
     through the substitution
                                                              1
                                              y = y1 (t) +        .
                                                             v(t)
     Show that v(t) satisfies the first order linear equation
                                         dv
                                             = −(q2 + 2q3 y1 )v − q3 .
                                         dt
     Note that v(t) will contain a single arbitrary constant.
23 Riccati equations are named for Jacopo Francesco Riccati (1676–1754), a Venetian nobleman, who
declined university appointments in Italy,Austria, and Russia to pursue his mathematical studies privately
at home. Riccati studied these equations extensively; however, it was Euler (in 1760) who discovered the
result stated in this problem.
34. Using the method of Problem 33 and the given particular solution, solve each of the
     following Riccati equations:
                                                                       1       y                1
     (a) y = 1 + t 2 − 2ty + y2 ;        y1 (t) = t    (b) y = − 2 − + y2 ;          y1 (t) =
                                                                      t        t                t
            dy     2 cos2 t − sin2 t + y2
     (c)        =                         ;      y1 (t) = sin t
            dt             2 cos t
35. The propagation of a single action in a large population (for example, drivers turning on
     headlights at sunset) often depends partly on external circumstances (gathering darkness)
     and partly on a tendency to imitate others who have already performed the action in
     question. In this case the proportion y(t) of people who have performed the action can be
     described24 by the equation
                                          dy/dt = (1 − y)[x(t) + by],                               (i)
     where x(t) measures the external stimulus and b is the imitation coefficient.
     (a) Observe that Eq. (i) is a Riccati equation and that y1 (t) = 1 is one solution. Use the
     transformation suggested in Problem 33, and find the linear equation satisfied by v(t).
     (b) Find v(t) in the case that x(t) = at, where a is a constant. Leave your answer in the
     form of an integral.
Some Special Second Order Equations. Second order equations involve the second deriva-
tive of the unknown function and have the general form y = f (t, y, y ). Usually such equations
cannot be solved by methods designed for first order equations. However, there are two types
of second order equations that can be transformed into first order equations by a suitable
change of variable. The resulting equation can sometimes be solved by the methods presented
in this chapter. Problems 36 through 51 deal with these types of equations.
Equations with the Dependent Variable Missing. For a second order differential equation
of the form y = f (t, y ), the substitution v = y , v = y leads to a first order equation of the
form v = f (t, v). If this equation can be solved for v, then y can be obtained by integrating
dy/dt = v. Note that one arbitrary constant is obtained in solving the first order equation for
v, and a second is introduced in the integration for y. In each of Problems 36 through 41, use
this substitution to solve the given equation.
36. t 2 y + 2ty − 1 = 0,        t>0                  37. ty + y = 1,        t>0
              2
38. y + t(y ) = 0                                       39. 2t 2 y + (y )3 = 2ty , t>0
40. y + y = e−t                                      41. t 2 y = (y )2 ,    t>0
Equations with the Independent Variable Missing. Consider second order differential equa-
tions of the form y = f (y, y ), in which the independent variable t does not appear explicitly.
If we let v = y , then we obtain dv/dt = f (y, v). Since the right side of this equation depends on
y and v, rather than on t and v, this equation contains too many variables. However, if we think
of y as the independent variable, then by the chain rule, dv/dt = (dv/dy)(dy/dt) = v(dv/dy).
Hence the original differential equation can be written as v(dv/dy) = f (y, v). Provided that
this first order equation can be solved, we obtain v as a function of y. A relation between y
and t results from solving dy/dt = v(y), which is a separable equation. Again, there are two
24 See Anatol Rapoport, “Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Mass Behavior: I. The Propagation
of Single Acts,” Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 14 (1952), pp. 159–169, and John Z. Hearon, “Note
on the Theory of Mass Behavior,” Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 17 (1955), pp. 7–13.
           arbitrary constants in the final result. In each of Problems 42 through 47, use this method to
           solve the given differential equation.
           42. yy + (y )2 = 0                                 43. y + y = 0
                           3
           44. y + y(y ) = 0                                     45. 2y2 y + 2y(y )2 = 1
                           3
           46. yy − (y ) = 0                                     47. y + (y )2 = 2e−y
           Hint: In Problem 47 the transformed equation is a Bernoulli equation. See Problem 27 in
           Section 2.4.
           In each of Problems 48 through 51, solve the given initial value problem using the methods of
           Problems 36 through 47.
           48. y y = 2,       y(0) = 1, y (0) = 2
                 
           49. y − 3y = 0,2
                                      y(0) = 2, y (0) = 4
           50. (1 + t )y + 2ty + 3t −2 = 0,
                       2         
                                                       y(1) = 2, y (1) = −1
           51. y y − t = 0,       y(1) = 2, y (1) = 1
REFERENCES The two books mentioned in Section 2.5 are
           Bailey, N. T. J., The Mathematical Theory of Infectious Diseases and Its Applications (2nd ed.) (New York:
              Hafner Press, 1975).
           Clark, Colin W., Mathematical Bioeconomics (2nd ed.) (New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1990).
              A good introduction to population dynamics in general is
           Frauenthal, J. C., Introduction to Population Modeling (Boston: Birkhauser, 1980).
              A fuller discussion of the proof of the fundamental existence and uniqueness theorem can be found in
           many more advanced books on differential equations. Two that are reasonably accessible to elementary
           readers are
           Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
              Hall, 1961; New York: Dover, 1989).
           Brauer, F., and Nohel, J.,The Qualitative Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations (New York: Benjamin,
              1969; New York: Dover, 1989).
              A valuable compendium of methods for solving differential equations is
           Zwillinger, D., Handbook of Differential Equations (3rd ed.) (San Diego: Academic Press, 1998).
              For further discussion and examples of nonlinear phenomena, including bifurcations and chaos, see
           Strogatz, Steven H., Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1994).
              A general reference on difference equations is
           Mickens, R. E., Difference Equations, Theory and Applications (2nd ed.) (New York: Van Nostrand
              Reinhold, 1990).
              Two papers by Robert May cited in the text are
              R. M. May,“Biological Populations with Nonoverlapping Generations: Stable Points, Stable Cycles, and
           Chaos,” Science 186 (1974), pp. 645–647; “Biological Populations Obeying Difference Equations: Stable
           Points, Stable Cycles, and Chaos,” Journal of Theoretical Biology 51 (1975), pp. 511–524.
              An elementary treatment of chaotic solutions of difference equations is
           Devaney, R. L., Chaos, Fractals, and Dynamics (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1990).
 CHAPTER
     3
             Second Order Linear
             Equations
             Linear equations of second order are of crucial importance in the study of differential
             equations for two main reasons. The first is that linear equations have a rich theo-
             retical structure that underlies a number of systematic methods of solution. Further,
             a substantial portion of this structure and of these methods is understandable at a
             fairly elementary mathematical level. In order to present the key ideas in the sim-
             plest possible context, we describe them in this chapter for second order equations.
             Another reason to study second order linear equations is that they are vital to any
             serious investigation of the classical areas of mathematical physics. One cannot go
             very far in the development of fluid mechanics, heat conduction, wave motion, or
             electromagnetic phenomena without finding it necessary to solve second order lin-
             ear differential equations. As an example, we discuss the oscillations of some basic
             mechanical and electrical systems at the end of the chapter.
3.1 Homogeneous Equations with Constant Coefficients
             A second order ordinary differential equation has the form
                                                        
                                                d2 y            dy
                                                     =f   t, y,    ,                            (1)
                                                dt 2            dt
             where f is some given function. Usually, we will denote the independent variable
             by t since time is often the independent variable in physical problems, but some-
             times we will use x instead. We will use y, or occasionally some other letter, to
             designate the dependent variable. Equation (1) is said to be linear if the function f
                                                                                               137
has the form                    
                                        dy                      dy
                              f   t, y,      = g(t) − p(t)         − q(t)y,                         (2)
                                        dt                      dt
that is, if f is linear in y and dy/dt. In Eq. (2) g, p, and q are specified functions of
the independent variable t but do not depend on y. In this case we usually rewrite
Eq. (1) as
                                     y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),                                   (3)
where the primes denote differentiation with respect to t. Instead of Eq. (3), we often
see the equation
                                 P(t)y + Q(t)y + R(t)y = G(t).                                   (4)
Of course, if P(t)  = 0, we can divide Eq. (4) by P(t) and thereby obtain Eq. (3) with
                                Q(t)                  R(t)                 G(t)
                      p(t) =          ,      q(t) =          ,     g(t) =        .                  (5)
                                P(t)                  P(t)                  P(t)
In discussing Eq. (3) and in trying to solve it, we will restrict ourselves to intervals in
which p, q, and g are continuous functions.1
   If Eq. (1) is not of the form (3) or (4), then it is called nonlinear. Analytical investi-
gations of nonlinear equations are relatively difficult,so we will have little to say about
them in this book. Numerical or geometical approaches are often more appropriate,
and these are discussed in Chapters 8 and 9.
   An initial value problem consists of a differential equation such as Eq. (1), (3), or
(4) together with a pair of initial conditions
                                     y(t0 ) = y0 ,      y (t0 ) = y0 ,                            (6)
where y0 and y0 are given numbers prescribing values for y and y at the initial
point t0 . Observe that the initial conditions for a second order equation identify not
only a particular point (t0 , y0 ) through which the graph of the solution must pass,
but also the slope y0 of the graph at that point. It is reasonable to expect that two
initial conditions are needed for a second order equation because, roughly speaking,
two integrations are required to find a solution and each integration introduces an
arbitrary constant. Presumably, two initial conditions will suffice to determine values
for these two constants.
   A second order linear equation is said to be homogeneous if the term g(t) in
Eq. (3), or the term G(t) in Eq. (4), is zero for all t. Otherwise, the equation is
called nonhomogeneous. As a result, the term g(t), or G(t), is sometimes called the
nonhomogeneous term. We begin our discussion with homogeneous equations, which
we will write in the form
                                   P(t)y + Q(t)y + R(t)y = 0.                                    (7)
Later, in Sections 3.5 and 3.6, we will show that once the homogeneous equation
has been solved, it is always possible to solve the corresponding nonhomogeneous
1There is a corresponding treatment of higher order linear equations in Chapter 4. If you wish, you may
read the appropriate parts of Chapter 4 in parallel with Chapter 3.
        equation (4), or at least to express the solution in terms of an integral. Thus the
        problem of solving the homogeneous equation is the more fundamental one.
            In this chapter we will concentrate our attention on equations in which the
        functions P, Q, and R are constants. In this case, Eq. (7) becomes
                                                   ay + by + cy = 0,                                      (8)
        where a, b, and c are given constants. It turns out that Eq. (8) can always be solved
        easily in terms of the elementary functions of calculus. On the other hand, it is usu-
        ally much more difficult to solve Eq. (7) if the coefficients are not constants, and
        a treatment of that case is deferred until Chapter 5. Before taking up Eq. (8), let
        us first gain some experience by looking at a simple example that in many ways is
        typical.
        Solve the equation
EXAMPLE                                                  y − y = 0,                                        (9)
   1
        and also find the solution that satisfies the initial conditions
                                               y(0) = 2,          y (0) = −1.                              (10)
            Observe that Eq. (9) is just Eq. (8) with a = 1, b = 0, and c = −1. In words, Eq. (9) says that
        we seek a function with the property that the second derivative of the function is the same as the
        function itself. Do any of the functions that you studied in calculus have this property? A little
        thought will probably produce at least one such function, namely, y1 (t) = et , the exponential
        function. A little more thought may also produce a second function, y2 (t) = e−t . Some further
        experimentation reveals that constant multiples of these two solutions are also solutions. For
        example, the functions 2et and 5e−t also satisfy Eq. (9), as you can verify by calculating their
        second derivatives. In the same way, the functions c1 y1 (t) = c1 et and c2 y2 (t) = c2 e−t satisfy the
        differential equation (9) for all values of the constants c1 and c2 .
            Next, it is vital to notice that the sum of any two solutions of Eq. (9) is also a solution.
        In particular, since c1 y1 (t) and c2 y2 (t) are solutions of Eq. (9) for any values of c1 and c2 , so is
        the function
                                          y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) = c1 et + c2 e−t .                      (11)
        Again, this can be verified by calculating the second derivative y from Eq. (11). We have
        y = c1 et − c2 e−t and y = c1 et + c2 e−t ; thus y is the same as y, and Eq. (9) is satisfied.
            Let us summarize what we have done so far in this example. Once we notice that the functions
        y1 (t) = et and y2 (t) = e−t are solutions of Eq. (9), it follows that the general linear combination
        (11) of these functions is also a solution. Since the coefficients c1 and c2 in Eq. (11) are arbitrary,
        this expression represents an infinite family of solutions of the differential equation (9).
            It is now possible to consider how to pick out a particular member of this infinite family of
        solutions that also satisfies a given set of initial conditions (10). In other words, we seek the
        solution that passes through the point (0, 2) and at that point has the slope −1. First, we set
        t = 0 and y = 2 in Eq. (11); this gives the equation
                                                         c1 + c2 = 2.                                       (12)
        Next, we differentiate Eq. (11) with the result that
                                                      y = c1 et − c2 e−t .
Then, setting t = 0 and y = −1, we obtain
                                           c1 − c2 = −1.                                   (13)
By solving Eqs. (12) and (13) simultaneously for c1 and c2 , we find that
                                        c1 = 21 ,      c2 = 23 .                           (14)
Finally, inserting these values in Eq. (11), we obtain
                                          y = 21 et + 23 e−t ,                             (15)
the solution of the initial value problem consisting of the differential equation (9) and the
initial conditions (10).
   What conclusions can we draw from the preceding example that will help us to
deal with the more general equation (8),
                                      ay + by + cy = 0,
whose coefficients a, b, and c are arbitrary (real) constants? In the first place, in the
example the solutions were exponential functions. Further, once we had identified
two solutions, we were able to use a linear combination of them to satisfy the given
initial conditions as well as the differential equation itself.
   It turns out that by exploiting these two ideas, we can solve Eq. (8) for any values
of its coefficients and also satisfy any given set of initial conditions for y and y .
We start by seeking exponential solutions of the form y = ert , where r is a parameter
to be determined. Then it follows that y = rert and y = r 2 ert . By substituting these
expressions for y, y , and y in Eq. (8), we obtain
                                     (ar 2 + br + c)ert = 0,
or, since ert  = 0,
                                        ar 2 + br + c = 0.                                 (16)
Equation (16) is called the characteristic equation for the differential equation (8).
Its significance lies in the fact that if r is a root of the polynomial equation (16), then
y = ert is a solution of the differential equation (8). Since Eq. (16) is a quadratic
equation with real coefficients, it has two roots, which may be real and different, real
but repeated, or complex conjugates. We consider the first case here and the latter
two cases in Sections 3.3 and 3.4.
   Assuming that the roots of the characteristic equation (16) are real and different,
let them be denoted by r1 and r2 , where r1  = r2 . Then y1 (t) = er1 t and y2 (t) = er2 t are
two solutions of Eq. (8). Just as in Example 1, it now follows that
                            y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) = c1 er1 t + c2 er2 t                (17)
is also a solution of Eq. (8). To verify that this is so, we can differentiate the expression
in Eq. (17); hence
                                     y = c1 r1 er1 t + c2 r2 er2 t                        (18)
and
                                    y = c1 r12 er1 t + c2 r22 er2 t .                    (19)
        Substituting these expressions for y, y , and y in Eq. (8) and rearranging terms, we
        obtain
                       ay + by + cy = c1 (ar12 + br1 + c)er1 t + c2 (ar22 + br2 + c)er2 t .          (20)
        The quantities in the two sets of parentheses on the right-hand side of Eq. (20) are
        zero because r1 and r2 are roots of Eq. (16); therefore, y as given by Eq. (17) is indeed
        a solution of Eq. (8), as we wished to verify.
            Now suppose that we want to find the particular member of the family of solutions
        (17) that satisfies the initial conditions (6)
                                             y(t0 ) = y0 ,        y (t0 ) = y0 .
        By substituting t = t0 and y = y0 in Eq. (17), we obtain
                                                 c1 er1 t0 + c2 er2 t0 = y0 .                            (21)
        Similarly, setting t = t0 and y = y0 in Eq. (18) gives
                                              c1 r1 er1 t0 + c2 r2 er2 t0 = y0 .                        (22)
        On solving Eqs. (21) and (22) simultaneously for c1 and c2 , we find that
                                      y0 − y0 r2 −r1 t0                   y0 r1 − y0 −r2 t0
                               c1 =                 e      ,       c2 =                 e     .         (23)
                                        r1 − r2                             r 1 − r2
        Recall that r1 − r2  = 0 so that the expressions in Eq. (23) always make sense. Thus,
        no matter what initial conditions are assigned—that is, regardless of the values of
        t0 , y0 , and y0 in Eqs. (6)—it is always possible to determine c1 and c2 so that the
        initial conditions are satisfied. Moreover, there is only one possible choice of c1 and
        c2 for each set of initial conditions. With the values of c1 and c2 given by Eq. (23), the
        expression (17) is the solution of the initial value problem
                              ay + by + cy = 0,             y(t0 ) = y0 ,      y (t0 ) = y0 .      (24)
            It is possible to show, on the basis of the fundamental theorem cited in the next
        section, that all solutions of Eq. (8) are included in the expression (17), at least for the
        case in which the roots of Eq. (16) are real and different. Therefore, we call Eq. (17)
        the general solution of Eq. (8). The fact that any possible initial conditions can be
        satisfied by the proper choice of the constants in Eq. (17) makes more plausible the
        idea that this expression does include all solutions of Eq. (8).
            Let us now look at some further examples.
        Find the general solution of
EXAMPLE                                             y + 5y + 6y = 0.                                  (25)
   2        We assume that y = ert , and it then follows that r must be a root of the characteristic equation
                                          r 2 + 5r + 6 = (r + 2)(r + 3) = 0.
        Thus the possible values of r are r1 = −2 and r2 = −3; the general solution of Eq. (25) is
                                                   y = c1 e−2t + c2 e−3t .                               (26)
        Find the solution of the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                    y + 5y + 6y = 0,        y(0) = 2,     y (0) = 3.                  (27)
   3
           The general solution of the differential equation was found in Example 2 and is given by
        Eq. (26). To satisfy the first initial condition, we set t = 0 and y = 2 in Eq. (26); thus c1 and c2
        must satisfy
                                                       c1 + c2 = 2.                                       (28)
        To use the second initial condition, we must first differentiate Eq. (26). This gives
        y = −2c1 e−2t − 3c2 e−3t . Then, setting t = 0 and y = 3, we obtain
                                                     −2c1 − 3c2 = 3.                                      (29)
        By solving Eqs. (28) and (29), we find that c1 = 9 and c2 = −7. Using these values in the
        expression (26), we obtain the solution
                                                    y = 9e−2t − 7e−3t                                     (30)
        of the initial value problem (27). The graph of the solution is shown in Figure 3.1.1.
                           y
                           2
                                                     y = 9e–2 t – 7e–3t
                           1
                                          0.5          1            1.5            2         t
                           FIGURE 3.1.1 Solution of the initial value problem (27):
                                       y + 5y + 6y = 0, y(0) = 2, y (0) = 3.
        Find the solution of the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                   4y − 8y + 3y = 0,         y(0) = 2,    y (0) = 21 .                (31)
   4
           If y = e , then we obtain the characteristic equation
                    rt
                                                    4r 2 − 8r + 3 = 0
        whose roots are r = 3/2 and r = 1/2. Therefore, the general solution of the differential
        equation is
                                                   y = c1 e3t/2 + c2 et/2 .                               (32)
        Applying the initial conditions, we obtain the following two equations for c1 and c2 :
                                            c1 + c2 = 2,        3
                                                                  c + 21 c2 = 21 .
                                                                2 1
        The solution of these equations is c1 = − 21 , c2 = 25 , so the solution of the initial value problem
        (31) is
                                                  y = − 21 e3t/2 + 25 et/2 .                              (33)
        Figure 3.1.2 shows the graph of the solution.
                            y
                            2
                                                                     1 3t/2   5
                                                              y=–      e    + et/2
                                                                     2        2
                            1
                                         0.5          1          1.5            2            t
                           –1
                           FIGURE 3.1.2 Solution of the initial value problem (31):
                                   4y − 8y + 3y = 0, y(0) = 2, y (0) = 0.5.
        The solution (30) of the initial value problem (27) initially increases (because its initial slope
EXAMPLE is positive) but eventually approaches zero (because both terms involve negative exponential
   5    functions). Therefore, the solution must have a maximum point, and the graph in Figure 3.1.1
        confirms this. Determine the location of this maximum point.
           The coordinates of the maximum point can be estimated from the graph, but to find
        them more precisely, we seek the point where the solution has a horizontal tangent line.
        By differentiating the solution (30), y = 9e−2t − 7e−3t , with respect to t, we obtain
                                               y = −18e−2t + 21e−3t .                                    (34)
        Setting y equal to zero and multiplying by e3t , we find that the critical value tm satisfies et = 7/6;
        hence
                                              tm = ln(7/6) ∼= 0.15415.                                    (35)
        The corresponding maximum value ym is given by
                                                               108 ∼
                                     ym = 9e−2tm − 7e−3tm =         = 2.20408.                            (36)
                                                               49
           In this example the initial slope is 3, but the solution of the given differential equation
        behaves in a similar way for any other positive initial slope. In Problem 26 you are asked to
        determine how the coordinates of the maximum point depend on the initial slope.
           Returning to the equation ay + by + cy = 0 with arbitrary coefficients, recall
        that when r1  = r2 , its general solution (17) is the sum of two exponential functions.
        Therefore, the solution has a relatively simple geometrical behavior: as t increases,
        the magnitude of the solution either tends to zero (when both exponents are nega-
        tive) or else grows rapidly (when at least one exponent is positive). These two cases
        are illustrated by the solutions of Examples 3 and 4, which are shown in Figures 3.1.1
        and 3.1.2, respectively. There is also a third case that occurs less often: the solution
        approaches a constant when one exponent is zero and the other is negative.
           In Sections 3.3 and 3.4, respectively, we return to the problem of solving the
        equation ay + by + cy = 0 when the roots of the characteristic equation either
        are complex conjugates or are real and equal. In the meantime, in Section 3.2,
        we provide a systematic discussion of the mathematical structure of the solutions
        of all second order linear homogeneous equations.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 8, find the general solution of the given differential equation.
          1. y + 2y − 3y = 0                             2. y + 3y + 2y = 0
                    
          3. 6y − y − y = 0                                 4. 2y − 3y + y = 0
          5. y + 5y = 0                                  6. 4y − 9y = 0
                    
          7. y − 9y + 9y = 0                                8. y − 2y − 2y = 0
         In each of Problems 9 through 16, find the solution of the given initial value problem. Sketch
         the graph of the solution and describe its behavior as t increases.
          9. y + y − 2y = 0,     y(0) = 1, y (0) = 1
                    
         10. y + 4y + 3y = 0,         y(0) = 2, y (0) = −1
                      
         11. 6y − 5y + y = 0,         y(0) = 4, y (0) = 0
         12. y + 3y = 0,     y(0) = −2, y (0) = 3
                    
         13. y + 5y + 3y = 0,         y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0
                    
         14. 2y + y − 4y = 0,         y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1
                    
         15. y + 8y − 9y = 0,         y(1) = 1, y (1) = 0
         16. 4y − y = 0,      y(−2) = 1, y (−2) = −1
         17. Find a differential equation whose general solution is y = c1 e2t + c2 e−3t .
         18. Find a differential equation whose general solution is y = c1 e−t/2 + c2 e−2t .
         19. Find the solution of the initial value problem
                                        y − y = 0,     y(0) = 54 ,  y (0) = − 34 .
             Plot the solution for 0 ≤ t ≤ 2 and determine its minimum value.
         20. Find the solution of the initial value problem
                                     2y − 3y + y = 0,      y(0) = 2,     y (0) = 21 .
             Then determine the maximum value of the solution and also find the point where the
             solution is zero.
         21. Solve the initial value problem y − y − 2y = 0, y(0) = α, y (0) = 2. Then find α so that
             the solution approaches zero as t → ∞.
         22. Solve the initial value problem 4y − y = 0, y(0) = 2, y (0) = β. Then find β so that the
             solution approaches zero as t → ∞.
         In each of Problems 23 and 24, determine the values of α, if any, for which all solutions tend to
         zero as t → ∞; also determine the values of α, if any, for which all (nonzero) solutions become
         unbounded as t → ∞.
         23. y − (2α − 1)y + α(α − 1)y = 0
         24. y + (3 − α)y − 2(α − 1)y = 0
         25. Consider the initial value problem
                                   2y + 3y − 2y = 0,      y(0) = 1,     y (0) = −β,
             where β > 0.
             (a) Solve the initial value problem.
             (b) Plot the solution when β = 1. Find the coordinates (t0 , y0 ) of the minimum point of
             the solution in this case.
             (c) Find the smallest value of β for which the solution has no minimum point.
                26. Consider the initial value problem (see Example 5)
                                            y + 5y + 6y = 0,     y(0) = 2,   y (0) = β,
                    where β > 0.
                    (a) Solve the initial value problem.
                    (b) Determine the coordinates tm and ym of the maximum point of the solution as func-
                    tions of β.
                    (c) Determine the smallest value of β for which ym ≥ 4.
                    (d) Determine the behavior of tm and ym as β → ∞.
                27. Consider the equation ay + by + cy = d, where a, b, c, and d are constants.
                    (a) Find all equilibrium, or constant, solutions of this differential equation.
                    (b) Let ye denote an equilibrium solution, and let Y = y − ye . Thus Y is the deviation of
                    a solution y from an equilibrium solution. Find the differential equation satisfied by Y.
                28. Consider the equation ay + by + cy = 0, where a, b, and c are constants with a > 0. Find
                    conditions on a, b, and c such that the roots of the characteristic equation are:
                    (a) real, different, and negative.
                    (b) real with opposite signs.
                    (c) real, different, and positive.
3.2 Solutions of Linear Homogeneous Equations; the Wronskian
                In the preceding section we showed how to solve some differential equations of the
                form
                                                       ay + by + cy = 0,
                where a, b, and c are constants. Now we build on those results to provide a clearer
                picture of the structure of the solutions of all second order linear homogeneous
                equations. In turn, this understanding will assist us in finding the solutions of other
                problems that we will encounter later.
                  To discuss general properties of linear differential equations, it is helpful to intro-
                duce a differential operator notation. Let p and q be continuous functions on an
                open interval I—that is, for α < t < β. The cases for α = −∞, or β = ∞, or both,
                are included. Then, for any function φ that is twice differentiable on I, we define the
                differential operator L by the equation
                                                     L[φ] = φ + pφ + qφ.                                 (1)
                Note that L[φ] is a function on I. The value of L[φ] at a point t is
                                           L[φ](t) = φ (t) + p(t)φ (t) + q(t)φ(t).
                For example, if p(t) = t 2 , q(t) = 1 + t, and φ(t) = sin 3t, then
                                      L[φ](t) = (sin 3t) + t 2 (sin 3t) + (1 + t) sin 3t
                                                = −9 sin 3t + 3t 2 cos 3t + (1 + t) sin 3t.
              The operator L is often written as L = D2 + pD + q, where D is the derivative
              operator.
                 In this section we study the second order linear homogeneous equation
              L[φ](t) = 0. Since it is customary to use the symbol y to denote φ(t), we will usually
              write this equation in the form
                                              L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0.                          (2)
              With Eq. (2) we associate a set of initial conditions
                                                y(t0 ) = y0 ,     y (t0 ) = y0 ,                      (3)
              where t0 is any point in the interval I, and y0 and y0                are given real numbers.
              We would like to know whether the initial value problem (2), (3) always has a solu-
              tion, and whether it may have more than one solution. We would also like to know
              whether anything can be said about the form and structure of solutions that might
              be helpful in finding solutions of particular problems. Answers to these questions are
              contained in the theorems in this section.
                 The fundamental theoretical result for initial value problems for second order
              linear equations is stated in Theorem 3.2.1, which is analogous to Theorem 2.4.1
              for first order linear equations. The result applies equally well to nonhomogeneous
              equations, so the theorem is stated in that form.
Theorem 3.2.1 (Existence and Uniqueness Theorem)
              Consider the initial value problem
                              y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),         y(t0 ) = y0 ,    y (t0 ) = y0 ,   (4)
              where p, q, and g are continuous on an open interval I that contains the point t0 .
              Then there is exactly one solution y = φ(t) of this problem, and the solution exists
              throughout the interval I.
                 We emphasize that the theorem says three things:
              1. The initial value problem has a solution; in other words, a solution exists.
              2. The initial value problem has only one solution; that is, the solution is unique.
              3. The solution φ is defined throughout the interval I where the coefficients are continuous
                  and is at least twice differentiable there.
                 For some problems some of these assertions are easy to prove. For instance, we
              found in Example 1 of Section 3.1 that the initial value problem
                                         y − y = 0,       y(0) = 2,       y (0) = −1                 (5)
              has the solution
                                                       y = 21 et + 23 e−t .                             (6)
              The fact that we found a solution certainly establishes that a solution exists for this
              initial value problem. Further, the solution (6) is twice differentiable, indeed differen-
              tiable any number of times, throughout the interval (−∞, ∞) where the coefficients
              in the differential equation are continuous. On the other hand, it is not obvious, and
              is more difficult to show, that the initial value problem (5) has no solutions other
              than the one given by Eq. (6). Nevertheless, Theorem 3.2.1 states that this solution
              is indeed the only solution of the initial value problem (5).
                  For most problems of the form (4), it is not possible to write down a useful expres-
              sion for the solution. This is a major difference between first order and second order
              linear equations. Therefore, all parts of the theorem must be proved by general meth-
              ods that do not involve having such an expression. The proof of Theorem 3.2.1 is fairly
              difficult, and we do not discuss it here.2 We will, however, accept Theorem 3.2.1 as
              true and make use of it whenever necessary.
              Find the longest interval in which the solution of the initial value problem
 EXAMPLE
                                    (t 2 − 3t)y + ty − (t + 3)y = 0,       y(1) = 2,     y (1) = 1
      1
              is certain to exist.
                  If the given differential equation is written in the form of Eq. (4), then p(t) = 1/(t − 3),
              q(t) = −(t + 3)/t(t − 3), and g(t) = 0. The only points of discontinuity of the coefficients are
              t = 0 and t = 3. Therefore, the longest open interval, containing the initial point t = 1, in
              which all the coefficients are continuous is 0 < t < 3. Thus, this is the longest interval in which
              Theorem 3.2.1 guarantees that the solution exists.
              Find the unique solution of the initial value problem
 EXAMPLE
                                         y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,      y(t0 ) = 0,  y (t0 ) = 0,
      2
              where p and q are continuous in an open interval I containing t0 .
                  The function y = φ(t) = 0 for all t in I certainly satisfies the differential equation and ini-
              tial conditions. By the uniqueness part of Theorem 3.2.1, it is the only solution of the given
              problem.
                  Let us now assume that y1 and y2 are two solutions of Eq. (2); in other words,
                                                    L[y1 ] = y1 + py1 + qy1 = 0,
              and similarly for y2 . Then, just as in the examples in Section 3.1, we can generate
              more solutions by forming linear combinations of y1 and y2 . We state this result as a
              theorem.
Theorem 3.2.2 (Principle of Superposition)
              If y1 and y2 are two solutions of the differential equation (2),
                                                 L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,
              then the linear combination c1 y1 + c2 y2 is also a solution for any values of the
              constants c1 and c2 .
              2A proof of Theorem 3.2.1 can be found, for example, in Chapter 6, Section 8 of the book by Coddington
              listed in the references at the end of this chapter.
  A special case of Theorem 3.2.2 occurs if either c1 or c2 is zero. Then we conclude
that any constant multiple of a solution of Eq. (2) is also a solution.
  To prove Theorem 3.2.2, we need only substitute
                                            y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t)                                         (7)
for y in Eq. (2). By calculating the indicated derivatives and rearranging terms, we
obtain
            L[c1 y1 + c2 y2 ] = [c1 y1 + c2 y2 ] + p[c1 y1 + c2 y2 ] + q[c1 y1 + c2 y2 ]
                                  = c1 y1 + c2 y2 + c1 py1 + c2 py2 + c1 qy1 + c2 qy2
                                  = c1 [y1 + py1 + qy1 ] + c2 [y2 + py2 + qy2 ]
                                  = c1 L[y1 ] + c2 L[y2 ].
Since L[y1 ] = 0 and L[y2 ] = 0, it follows that L[c1 y1 + c2 y2 ] = 0 also. Therefore,
regardless of the values of c1 and c2 , y as given by Eq. (7) satisfies the differential
equation (2), and the proof of Theorem 3.2.2 is complete.
  Theorem 3.2.2 states that, beginning with only two solutions of Eq. (2), we can
construct an infinite family of solutions by means of Eq. (7). The next question is
whether all solutions of Eq. (2) are included in Eq. (7) or whether there may be
other solutions of a different form. We begin to address this question by examining
whether the constants c1 and c2 in Eq. (7) can be chosen so as to satisfy the initial
conditions (3). These initial conditions require c1 and c2 to satisfy the equations
                                          c1 y1 (t0 ) + c2 y2 (t0 ) = y0 ,
                                                                                                              (8)
                                          c1 y1 (t0 ) + c2 y2 (t0 ) = y0 .
The determinant of coefficients of the system (8) is
                                                     
                                y (t ) y (t )
                                 1 0          2 0 
                       W =                           = y1 (t0 )y2 (t0 ) − y1 (t0 )y2 (t0 ).              (9)
                                y1 (t0 ) y2 (t0 )
   If W  = 0, then Eqs. (8) have a unique solution (c1 , c2 ) regardless of the values of
y0 and y0 . This solution is given by
                   y0 y2 (t0 ) − y0 y2 (t0 )                          −y0 y1 (t0 ) + y0 y1 (t0 )
        c1 =                                         ,      c2 =                                           , (10)
              y1 (t0 )y2 (t0 ) − y1 (t0 )y2 (t0 )                  y1 (t0 )y2 (t0 ) − y1 (t0 )y2 (t0 )
or, in terms of determinants,
                                                                                          
                                  y y (t )                               y (t )       y0 
                                   0       2 0                            1 0
                                                                                        
                                  y0 y2 (t0 )                           y1 (t0 )     y0 
                       c1 =                           ,       c2 =                          .            (11)
                                y (t ) y (t )                         y (t )       y2 (t0 )
                                 1 0          2 0                      1 0
                                                                                          
                                y1 (t0 ) y2 (t0 )                    y1 (t0 )     y2 (t0 )
With these values for c1 and c2 , the linear combination y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) satis-
fies the initial conditions (3) as well as the differential equation (2). Note that the
denominator in the expressions for c1 and c2 is the nonzero determinant W.
   On the other hand, if W = 0, then the denominators appearing in Eqs. (10) and
(11) are zero. In this case Eqs. (8) have no solution unless y0 and y0 have values that
also make the numerators in Eqs. (10) and (11) equal to zero. Thus, if W = 0, there are
many initial conditions that cannot be satisfied no matter how c1 and c2 are chosen.
                  The determinant W is called the Wronskian3 determinant,or simply the Wronskian,
              of the solutions y1 and y2 . Sometimes we use the more extended notation W(y1 , y2 )(t0 )
              to stand for the expression on the right side of Eq. (9), thereby emphasizing that the
              Wronskian depends on the functions y1 and y2 , and that it is evaluated at the point
              t0 . The preceding argument establishes the following result.
Theorem 3.2.3 Suppose that y1 and y2 are two solutions of Eq. (2)
                                                L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,
              and that the initial conditions (3)
                                                   y(t0 ) = y0 ,      y (t0 ) = y0
              are assigned. Then it is always possible to choose the constants c1 , c2 so that
                                                      y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t)
              satisfies the differential equation (2) and the initial conditions (3) if and only if the
              Wronskian
                                                         W = y1 y2 − y1 y2
              is not zero at t0 .
              In Example 2 of Section 3.1 we found that y1 (t) = e−2t and y2 (t) = e−3t are solutions of the
 EXAMPLE      differential equation
      3                                                   y + 5y + 6y = 0.
              Find the Wronskian of y1 and y2 .
                  The Wronskian of these two functions is
                                                         −2t               
                                                         e          e−3t 
                                                  W =                 −3t  = −e
                                                                                   −5t
                                                                                       .
                                                         −2e−2t     −3e
              Since W is nonzero for all values of t, the functions y1 and y2 can be used to construct solutions
              of the given differential equation, together with initial conditions prescribed at any value of t.
              One such initial value problem was solved in Example 3 of Section 3.1.
                  The next theorem justifies the term “general solution” that we introduced in
              Section 3.1 for the linear combination c1 y1 + c2 y2 .
Theorem 3.2.4 Suppose that y1 and y2 are two solutions of the differential equation (2),
                                                L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0.
              Then the family of solutions
                                                      y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t)
              with arbitrary coefficients c1 and c2 includes every solution of Eq. (2) if and only if
              there is a point t0 where the Wronskian of y1 and y2 is not zero.
              3Wronskian determinants are named for Jósef Maria Hoëné-Wronski (1776–1853), who was born in Pol-
              and but spent most of his life in France. Wronski was a gifted but troubled man, and his life was marked
              by frequent heated disputes with other individuals and institutions.
   Let φ be any solution of Eq. (2). To prove the theorem, we must determine whether
φ is included in the linear combinations c1 y1 + c2 y2 . That is, we must determine
whether there are values of the constants c1 and c2 that make the linear combi-
nation the same as φ. Let t0 be a point where the Wronskian of y1 and y2 is nonzero.
Then evaluate φ and φ at this point and call these values y0 and y0 , respectively; thus
                                 y0 = φ(t0 ),       y0 = φ (t0 ).
Next, consider the initial value problem
                   y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,        y(t0 ) = y0 ,   y (t0 ) = y0 .     (12)
The function φ is certainly a solution of this initial value problem. Further, because
we are assuming that W(y1 , y2 )(t0 ) is nonzero, it is possible (by Theorem 3.2.3)
to choose c1 and c2 such that y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) is also a solution of the initial
value problem (12). In fact, the proper values of c1 and c2 are given by Eqs. (10) or
(11). The uniqueness part of Theorem 3.2.1 guarantees that these two solutions of
the same initial value problem are actually the same function; thus, for the proper
choice of c1 and c2 ,
                                   φ(t) = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t),                         (13)
and therefore φ is included in the family of functions c1 y1 + c2 y2 . Finally, since φ is an
arbitrary solution of Eq. (2), it follows that every solution of this equation is included
in this family.
   Now suppose that there is no point t0 where the Wronskian is nonzero. Thus
W(y1 , y2 )(t0 ) = 0 no matter which point t0 is selected. Then (by Theorem 3.2.3) there
are values of y0 and y0 such that the system (8) has no solution for c1 and c2 . Select
a pair of such values and choose the solution φ(t) of Eq. (2) that satisfies the initial
condition (3). Observe that such a solution is guaranteed to exist by Theorem 3.2.l.
However, this solution is not included in the family y = c1 y1 + c2 y2 . Thus this linear
combination does not include all solutions of Eq. (2) if W(y1 , y2 ) = 0. This completes
the proof of Theorem 3.2.4.
  Theorem 3.2.4 states that,if and only if theWronskian of y1 and y2 is not everywhere
zero, then the linear combination c1 y1 + c2 y2 contains all solutions of Eq. (2). It is
therefore natural (and we have already done this in the preceding section) to call the
expression
                                     y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t)
with arbitrary constant coefficients the general solution of Eq. (2). The solutions
y1 and y2 are said to form a fundamental set of solutions of Eq. (2) if and only if their
Wronskian is nonzero.
  We can restate the result of Theorem 3.2.4 in slightly different language: to find
the general solution, and therefore all solutions, of an equation of the form (2), we
need only find two solutions of the given equation whose Wronskian is nonzero.
We did precisely this in several examples in Section 3.1, although there we did not
calculate the Wronskians. You should now go back and do that, thereby verifying
that all the solutions we called “general solutions” in Section 3.1 do satisfy the nec-
essary Wronskian condition. Alternatively, the following example includes all those
mentioned in Section 3.1, as well as many other problems of a similar type.
              Suppose that y1 (t) = er1 t and y2 (t) = er2 t are two solutions of an equation of the form (2). Show
 EXAMPLE      that they form a fundamental set of solutions if r1  = r2 .
      4          We calculate the Wronskian of y1 and y2 :
                                                     rt                  
                                                    e 1         er2 t 
                                                    
                                           W =  r1 t                       = (r2 − r1 ) exp[(r1 + r2 )t].
                                                     r1 e        r2 er2 t 
              Since the exponential function is never zero, and since we are assuming that r2 − r1  = 0, it
              follows that W is nonzero for every value of t. Consequently, y1 and y2 form a fundamental
              set of solutions.
              Show that y1 (t) = t 1/2 and y2 (t) = t −1 form a fundamental set of solutions of
 EXAMPLE
                                                       2t 2 y + 3ty − y = 0,             t > 0.              (14)
      5
                 We will show how to solve Eq. (14) later (see Problem 34 in Section 3.3). However, at
              this stage we can verify by direct substitution that y1 and y2 are solutions of the differential
              equation. Since y1 (t) = 21 t −1/2 and y1 (t) = − 14 t −3/2 , we have
                                    2t 2 (− 14 t −3/2 ) + 3t( 21 t −1/2 ) − t 1/2 = (− 21 + 23 − 1)t 1/2 = 0.
              Similarly, y2 (t) = −t −2 and y2 (t) = 2t −3 , so
                                          2t 2 (2t −3 ) + 3t(−t −2 ) − t −1 = (4 − 3 − 1)t −1 = 0.
              Next we calculate the Wronskian W of y1 and y2 :
                                                                 1/2                
                                                                 t            t −1 
                                                      W =  1 −1/2                    = − 23 t −3/2 .          (15)
                                                                 2
                                                                   t         −t −2 
              Since W = 0 for t > 0, we conclude that y1 and y2 form a fundamental set of solutions there.
                 In several cases we have been able to find a fundamental set of solutions, and
              therefore the general solution, of a given differential equation. However, this is often
              a difficult task, and the question arises as to whether a differential equation of the
              form (2) always has a fundamental set of solutions. The following theorem provides
              an affirmative answer to this question.
Theorem 3.2.5 Consider the differential equation (2),
                                                   L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,
              whose coefficients p and q are continuous on some open interval I. Choose some
              point t0 in I. Let y1 be the solution of Eq. (2) that also satisfies the initial conditions
                                                         y(t0 ) = 1,             y (t0 ) = 0,
              and let y2 be the solution of Eq. (2) that satisfies the initial conditions
                                                         y(t0 ) = 0,             y (t0 ) = 1.
              Then y1 and y2 form a fundamental set of solutions of Eq. (2).
           First observe that the existence of the functions y1 and y2 is ensured by the existence
        part of Theorem 3.2.1. To show that they form a fundamental set of solutions, we need
        only calculate their Wronskian at t0 :
                                                                                 
                                                       y (t )
                                                        1 0        y2 (t0 ) 1 0
                                  W(y1 , y2 )(t0 ) =                       =      = 1.
                                                       y1 (t0 )    y2 (t0 ) 0 1
        Since their Wronskian is not zero at the point t0 , the functions y1 and y2 do form a
        fundamental set of solutions, thus completing the proof of Theorem 3.2.5.
           Note that the potentially difficult part of this proof, demonstrating the existence
        of a pair of solutions, is taken care of by reference to Theorem 3.2.1. Note also that
        Theorem 3.2.5 does not address the question of how to find the solutions y1 and y2
        by solving the specified initial value problems. Nevertheless, it may be reassuring to
        know that a fundamental set of solutions always exists.
        Find the fundamental set of solutions y1 and y2 specified by Theorem 3.2.5 for the differential
EXAMPLE equation
   6                                                     y − y = 0,                                (16)
        using the initial point t0 = 0.
           In Section 3.1 we noted that two solutions of Eq. (16) are y1 (t) = et and y2 (t) = e−t . The
        Wronskian of these solutions is W(y1 , y2 )(t) = −2  = 0, so they form a fundamental set of
        solutions. However,they are not the fundamental solutions indicated byTheorem 3.2.5 because
        they do not satisfy the initial conditions mentioned in that theorem at the point t = 0.
           To find the fundamental solutions specified by the theorem, we need to find the solutions
        satisfying the proper initial conditions. Let us denote by y3 (t) the solution of Eq. (16) that
        satisfies the initial conditions
                                                 y(0) = 1,          y (0) = 0.                      (17)
        The general solution of Eq. (16) is
                                                      y = c1 et + c2 e−t ,                           (18)
        and the initial conditions (17) are satisfied if c1 = 1/2 and c2 = 1/2. Thus
                                               y3 (t) = 21 et + 21 e−t = cosh t.
        Similarly, if y4 (t) satisfies the initial conditions
                                                 y(0) = 0,          y (0) = 1,                      (19)
        then
                                               y4 (t) = 21 et − 21 e−t = sinh t.
        Since the Wronskian of y3 and y4 is
                                         W(y3 , y4 )(t) = cosh2 t − sinh2 t = 1,
              these functions also form a fundamental set of solutions, as stated by Theorem 3.2.5. Therefore,
              the general solution of Eq. (16) can be written as
                                                     y = k1 cosh t + k2 sinh t,                          (20)
              as well as in the form (18). We have used k1 and k2 for the arbitrary constants in Eq. (20)
              because they are not the same as the constants c1 and c2 in Eq. (18). One purpose of this
              example is to make it clear that a given differential equation has more than one fundamental
              set of solutions; indeed, it has infinitely many; see Problem 21. As a rule, you should choose
              the set that is most convenient.
                 In the next section we will encounter equations that have complex-valued solu-
              tions. The following theorem is fundamental in dealing with such equations and their
              solutions.
Theorem 3.2.6 Consider again the equation (2),
                                             L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,
              where p and q are continuous real-valued functions. If y = u(t) + iv(t) is a complex-
              valued solution of Eq. (2), then its real part u and its imaginary part v are also
              solutions of this equation.
                 To prove this theorem we substitute u(t) + iv(t) for y in L[y], obtaining
                             L[y] = u (t) + iv (t) + p(t)[u (t) + iv (t)] + q(t)[u(t) + iv(t)].    (21)
              Then, by separating Eq. (21) into its real and imaginary parts (and this is where we
              need to know that p(t) and q(t) are real-valued), we find that
                         L[y] = u (t) + p(t)u (t) + q(t)u(t) + i[v (t) + p(t)v (t) + q(t)v(t)]
                                = L[u](t) + iL[v](t).
                 Recall that a complex number is zero if and only if its real and imaginary parts
              are both zero. We know that L[y] = 0 because y is a solution of Eq. (2). Therefore,
              L[u](t) = 0 and L[v](t) = 0 also; consequently, u and v are also solutions of Eq. (2),
              so the theorem is established. We will see examples of the use of Theorem 3.2.6 in
              Section 3.3.
                 Incidentally, the complex conjugate y of a solution y is also a solution. This is a
              consequence of Theorem 3.2.2 since y = u(t) − iv(t) is a linear combination of two
              solutions.
                 Now let us examine further the properties of the Wronskian of two solutions
              of a second order linear homogeneous differential equation. The following the-
              orem, perhaps surprisingly, gives a simple explicit formula for the Wronskian of
              any two solutions of any such equation, even if the solutions themselves are not
              known.
Theorem 3.2.7 (Abel’s Theorem)4
              If y1 and y2 are solutions of the differential equation
                                              L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,                                     (22)
              where p and q are continuous on an open interval I, then the Wronskian W(y1 , y2 )(t)
              is given by                                                              
                                            W(y1 , y2 )(t) = c exp − p(t) dt ,                                     (23)
              where c is a certain constant that depends on y1 and y2 , but not on t. Further,
              W(y1 , y2 )(t) either is zero for all t in I (if c = 0) or else is never zero in I (if c = 0).
                 To prove Abel’s theorem, we start by noting that y1 and y2 satisfy
                                                    y1 + p(t)y1 + q(t)y1 = 0,
                                                                                                                     (24)
                                                    y2 + p(t)y2 + q(t)y2 = 0.
              If we multiply the first equation by −y2 , multiply the second by y1 , and add the
              resulting equations, we obtain
                                           (y1 y2 − y1 y2 ) + p(t)(y1 y2 − y1 y2 ) = 0.                        (25)
              Next, we let W(t) = W(y1 , y2 )(t) and observe that
                                                          W  = y1 y2 − y1 y2 .                                  (26)
              Then we can write Eq. (25) in the form
                                                           W  + p(t)W = 0.                                          (27)
              Equation (27) can be solved immediately since it is both a first order linear equation
              (Section 2.1) and a separable equation (Section 2.2). Thus
                                                                                   
                                                   W(t) = c exp − p(t) dt ,                                          (28)
              where c is a constant. The value of c depends on which pair of solutions of Eq. (22)
              is involved. However, since the exponential function is never zero, W(t) is not
              zero unless c = 0, in which case W(t) is zero for all t. This completes the proof of
              Theorem 3.2.7.
                 Note that the Wronskians of any two fundamental sets of solutions of the same dif-
              ferential equation can differ only by a multiplicative constant, and that the Wronskian
              of any fundamental set of solutions can be determined,up to a multiplicative constant,
              4The result in Theorem 3.2.7 was derived by the Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel (1802–
              1829) in 1827 and is known as Abel’s formula. Abel also showed that there is no general formula for
              solving a quintic, or fifth degree, polynomial equation in terms of explicit algebraic operations on the
              coefficients, thereby resolving a question that had been open since the sixteenth century. His greatest
              contributions, however, were in analysis, particularly in the study of elliptic functions. Unfortunately, his
              work was not widely noticed until after his death. The distinguished French mathematician Legendre
              called it a “monument more lasting than bronze.”
         without solving the differential equation. Further, since under the conditions of The-
         orem 3.2.7 the Wronskian W is either always zero or never zero, you can determine
         which case actually occurs by evaluating W at any single convenient value of t.
         In Example 5 we verified that y1 (t) = t 1/2 and y2 (t) = t −1 are solutions of the equation
 EXAMPLE
                                              2t 2 y + 3ty − y = 0,      t > 0.                   (29)
    7
         Verify that the Wronskian of y1 and y2 is given by Eq. (23).
            From the example just cited we know that W(y1 , y2 )(t) = −(3/2)t −3/2 . To use Eq. (23), we
         must write the differential equation (29) in the standard form with the coefficient of y equal
         to 1. Thus we obtain
                                                             3       1
                                                      y + y − 2 y = 0,
                                                             2t     2t
         so p(t) = 3/2t. Hence
                                                                                
                                                                   3                 3
                                 W(y1 , y2 )(t) = c exp −              dt = c exp − ln t
                                                                   2t                2
                                                = c t −3/2 .                                         (30)
         Equation (30) gives the Wronskian of any pair of solutions of Eq. (29). For the particular
         solutions given in this example, we must choose c = −3/2.
         Summary. We can summarize the discussion in this section as follows: to find the
         general solution of the differential equation
                                     y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,              α < t < β,
         we must first find two functions y1 and y2 that satisfy the differential equation in
         α < t < β. Then we must make sure that there is a point in the interval where the
         Wronskian W of y1 and y2 is nonzero. Under these circumstances y1 and y2 form a
         fundamental set of solutions, and the general solution is
                                                    y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t),
         where c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants. If initial conditions are prescribed at a point
         in α < t < β, then c1 and c2 can be chosen so as to satisfy these conditions.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, find the Wronskian of the given pair of functions.
          1. e2t , e−3t/2                                          2. cos t, sin t
          3. e−2t , te−2t                                          4. x, xex
               t          t
          5. e sin t, e cos t                                      6. cos2 θ, 1 + cos 2θ
         In each of Problems 7 through 12, determine the longest interval in which the given initial
         value problem is certain to have a unique twice-differentiable solution. Do not attempt to find
         the solution.
          7. ty + 3y = t,       y(1) = 1, y (1) = 2
          8. (t − 1)y − 3ty + 4y = sin t,            y(−2) = 2, y (−2) = 1
                             
          9. t(t − 4)y + 3ty + 4y = 2,              y(3) = 0, y (3) = −1
                          
         10. y + (cos t)y + 3(ln |t|)y = 0,               y(2) = 3, y (2) = 1
11. (x − 3)y + xy + (ln |x|)y = 0,                y(1) = 0, y (1) = 1
                    
12. (x − 2)y + y + (x − 2)(tan x)y = 0,                    y(3) = 1, y (3) = 2
13. Verify that y1 (t) = t 2 and y2 (t) = t −1 are two solutions of the differential equation
     t 2 y − 2y = 0 for t > 0. Then show that y = c1 t 2 + c2 t −1 is also a solution of this equation
     for any c1 and c2 .
14. Verify that y1 (t) = 1 and y2 (t) = t 1/2 are solutions of the differential equation
     yy + (y )2 = 0 for t > 0. Then show that y = c1 + c2 t 1/2 is not, in general, a solution of this
     equation. Explain why this result does not contradict Theorem 3.2.2.
15. Show that if y = φ(t) is a solution of the differential equation y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),
     where g(t) is not always zero, then y = cφ(t), where c is any constant other than 1, is not a
     solution. Explain why this result does not contradict the remark following Theorem 3.2.2.
16. Can y = sin(t 2 ) be a solution on an interval containing t = 0 of an equation
     y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0 with continuous coefficients? Explain your answer.
17. If the Wronskian W of f and g is 3e4t , and if f (t) = e2t , find g(t).
18. If the Wronskian W of f and g is t 2 et , and if f (t) = t, find g(t).
19. If W(f , g) is the Wronskian of f and g, and if u = 2f − g, v = f + 2g, find the Wronskian
     W(u, v) of u and v in terms of W(f , g).
20. If the Wronskian of f and g is t cos t − sin t, and if u = f + 3g, v = f − g, find the
     Wronskian of u and v.
21. Assume that y1 and y2 are a fundamental set of solutions of y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0 and let
     y3 = a1 y1 + a2 y2 and y4 = b1 y1 + b2 y2 , where a1 , a2 , b1 , and b2 are any constants. Show that
                                           W(y3 , y4 ) = (a1 b2 − a2 b1 )W(y1 , y2 ).
     Are y3 and y4 also a fundamental set of solutions? Why or why not?
In each of Problems 22 and 23, find the fundamental set of solutions specified by Theorem
3.2.5 for the given differential equation and initial point.
22. y + y − 2y = 0,              t0 = 0
23. y + 4y + 3y = 0,               t0 = 1
In each of Problems 24 through 27, verify that the functions y1 and y2 are solutions of the given
differential equation. Do they constitute a fundamental set of solutions?
24. y + 4y = 0;            y1 (t) = cos 2t, y2 (t) = sin 2t
25. y − 2y + y = 0;              y1 (t) = et , y2 (t) = tet
        2                
26. x y − x(x + 2)y + (x + 2)y = 0, x > 0;                       y1 (x) = x, y2 (x) = xex
                              
27. (1 − x cot x)y − xy + y = 0, 0 < x < π;                       y1 (x) = x, y2 (x) = sin x
28. Consider the equation y − y − 2y = 0.
     (a) Show that y1 (t) = e−t and y2 (t) = e2t form a fundamental set of solutions.
     (b) Let y3 (t) = −2e2t , y4 (t) = y1 (t) + 2y2 (t), and y5 (t) = 2y1 (t) − 2y3 (t). Are y3 (t), y4 (t),
     and y5 (t) also solutions of the given differential equation?
     (c) Determine whether each of the following pairs forms a fundamental set of solutions:
     [y1 (t), y3 (t)]; [y2 (t), y3 (t)]; [y1 (t), y4 (t)]; [y4 (t), y5 (t)].
In each of Problems 29 through 32, find the Wronskian of two solutions of the given differential
equation without solving the equation.
29. t 2 y − t(t + 2)y + (t + 2)y = 0                      30. (cos t)y + (sin t)y − ty = 0
        2        
31. x y + xy + (x − ν )y = 0,
                         2        2
                                                 Bessel’s equation
32. (1 − x2 )y − 2xy + α(α + 1)y = 0,                 Legendre’s equation
33. Show that if p is differentiable and p(t) > 0, then the Wronskian W(t) of two solutions of
    [p(t)y ] + q(t)y = 0 is W(t) = c/p(t), where c is a constant.
34. If the differential equation ty + 2y + tet y = 0 has y1 and y2 as a fundamental set of
    solutions and if W(y1 , y2 )(1) = 2, find the value of W(y1 , y2 )(5).
35. If the differential equation t 2 y − 2y + (3 + t)y = 0 has y1 and y2 as a fundamental set of
    solutions and if W(y1 , y2 )(2) = 3, find the value of W(y1 , y2 )(4).
36. If the Wronskian of any two solutions of y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0 is constant, what does this
    imply about the coefficients p and q?
37. If f , g, and h are differentiable functions, show that W(fg, fh) = f 2 W(g, h).
In Problems 38 through 40, assume that p and q are continuous and that the functions y1 and
y2 are solutions of the differential equation y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0 on an open interval I.
38. Prove that if y1 and y2 are zero at the same point in I, then they cannot be a fundamental
    set of solutions on that interval.
39. Prove that if y1 and y2 have maxima or minima at the same point in I, then they cannot
    be a fundamental set of solutions on that interval.
40. Prove that if y1 and y2 have a common point of inflection t0 in I, then they cannot be a
    fundamental set of solutions on I unless both p and q are zero at t0 .
41. Exact Equations. The equation
                                      P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0
    is said to be exact if it can be written in the form
                                          [P(x)y ] + [f (x)y] = 0,
    where f (x) is to be determined in terms of P(x), Q(x), and R(x). The latter equation can
    be integrated once immediately, resulting in a first order linear equation for y that can be
    solved as in Section 2.1. By equating the coefficients of the preceding equations and then
    eliminating f (x), show that a necessary condition for exactness is
                                         P  (x) − Q (x) + R(x) = 0.
    It can be shown that this is also a sufficient condition.
In each of Problems 42 through 45, use the result of Problem 41 to determine whether the
given equation is exact. If it is, then solve the equation.
42. y + xy + y = 0                                  43. y + 3x2 y + xy = 0
                   
44. xy − (cos x)y + (sin x)y = 0, x > 0                45. x2 y + xy − y = 0, x > 0
46. The Adjoint Equation. If a second order linear homogeneous equation is not exact, it can
    be made exact by multiplying by an appropriate integrating factor μ(x). Thus we require
    that μ(x) be such that
                               μ(x)P(x)y + μ(x)Q(x)y + μ(x)R(x)y = 0
    can be written in the form
                                      [μ(x)P(x)y ] + [ f (x)y] = 0.
    By equating coefficients in these two equations and eliminating f (x), show that the
    function μ must satisfy
                               Pμ + (2P  − Q)μ + (P  − Q + R)μ = 0.
                   This equation is known as the adjoint of the original equation and is important in
                   the advanced theory of differential equations. In general, the problem of solving the
                   adjoint differential equation is as difficult as that of solving the original equation, so only
                   occasionally is it possible to find an integrating factor for a second order equation.
              In each of Problems 47 through 49, use the result of Problem 46 to find the adjoint of the given
              differential equation.
              47. x2 y + xy + (x2 − ν2 )y = 0,    Bessel’s equation
                          2        
              48. (1 − x )y − 2xy + α(α + 1)y = 0,            Legendre’s equation
              49. y − xy = 0,       Airy’s equation
              50. For the second order linear equation P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0, show that the adjoint
                   of the adjoint equation is the original equation.
              51. A second order linear equation P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0 is said to be self-adjoint if
                   its adjoint is the same as the original equation. Show that a necessary condition for this
                   equation to be self-adjoint is that P  (x) = Q(x). Determine whether each of the equations
                   in Problems 47 through 49 is self-adjoint.
3.3 Complex Roots of the Characteristic Equation
              We continue our discussion of the equation
                                                     ay + by + cy = 0,                                     (1)
              where a, b, and c are given real numbers. In Section 3.1 we found that if we seek
              solutions of the form y = ert , then r must be a root of the characteristic equation
                                                      ar 2 + br + c = 0.                                      (2)
              We showed in Section 3.1 that if the roots r1 and r2 are real and different, which
              occurs whenever the discriminant b2 − 4ac is positive, then the general solution of
              Eq. (1) is
                                                      y = c1 er1 t + c2 er2 t .                               (3)
                 Suppose now that b2 − 4ac is negative. Then the roots of Eq. (2) are conjugate
              complex numbers; we denote them by
                                                r1 = λ + iμ,        r2 = λ − iμ,                              (4)
              where λ and μ are real. The corresponding expressions for y are
                                    y1 (t) = exp[(λ + iμ)t],        y2 (t) = exp[(λ − iμ)t].                  (5)
              Our first task is to explore what is meant by these expressions, which involve
              evaluating the exponential function for a complex exponent. For example, if
              λ = −1, μ = 2, and t = 3, then from Eq. (5),
                                                        y1 (3) = e−3+6i .                                     (6)
What does it mean to raise the number e to a complex power? The answer is provided
by an important relation known as Euler’s formula.
Euler’s Formula. To assign a meaning to the expressions in Eqs. (5), we need to give
a definition of the complex exponential function. Of course, we want the definition
to reduce to the familiar real exponential function when the exponent is real. There
are several ways to discover how this extension of the exponential function should
be defined. Here we use a method based on infinite series; an alternative is outlined
in Problem 28.
   Recall from calculus that the Taylor series for et about t = 0 is
                                   ∞ n
                                        t
                             et =          ,     −∞ < t < ∞.                          (7)
                                        n!
                                   n=0
If we now assume that we can substitute it for t in Eq. (7), then we have
                              ∞
                                   (it)n
                        eit =
                                    n!
                              n=0
                              ∞                  ∞
                                   (−1)n t 2n          (−1)n−1 t 2n−1
                            =                 +i                      ,               (8)
                              n=0
                                     (2n)!        n=1
                                                          (2n − 1)!
where we have separated the sum into its real and imaginary parts, making use of the
fact that i2 = −1, i3 = −i, i4 = 1, and so forth. The first series in Eq. (8) is precisely
the Taylor series for cos t about t = 0, and the second is the Taylor series for sin t
about t = 0. Thus we have
                                     eit = cos t + i sin t.                           (9)
Equation (9) is known as Euler’s formula and is an extremely important mathematical
relationship. Although our derivation of Eq. (9) is based on the unverified assumption
that the series (7) can be used for complex as well as real values of the independent
variable, our intention is to use this derivation only to make Eq. (9) seem plausible.
We now put matters on a firm foundation by adopting Eq. (9) as the definition of eit .
In other words, whenever we write eit , we mean the expression on the right side of
Eq. (9).
   There are some variations of Euler’s formula that are also worth noting. If we
replace t by −t in Eq. (9) and recall that cos(−t) = cos t and sin(−t) = − sin t, then
we have
                                    e−it = cos t − i sin t.                          (10)
Further, if t is replaced by μt in Eq. (9), then we obtain a generalized version of
Euler’s formula, namely,
                                  eiμt = cos μt + i sin μt.                          (11)
Next, we want to extend the definition of the exponential function to arbitrary
complex exponents of the form (λ + iμ)t. Since we want the usual properties
of the exponential function to hold for complex exponents, we certainly want
exp[(λ + iμ)t] to satisfy
                                      e(λ+iμ)t = eλt eiμt .                          (12)
        Then, substituting for eiμt from Eq. (11), we obtain
                                        e(λ+iμ)t = eλt (cos μt + i sin μt)
                                                 = eλt cos μt + ieλt sin μt.                        (13)
        We now take Eq. (13) as the definition of exp[(λ + iμ)t]. The value of the exponential
        function with a complex exponent is a complex number whose real and imaginary
        parts are given by the terms on the right side of Eq. (13). Observe that the real
        and imaginary parts of exp[(λ + iμ)t] are expressed entirely in terms of elementary
        real-valued functions. For example, the quantity in Eq. (6) has the value
                         e−3+6i = e−3 cos 6 + ie−3 sin 6 ∼     = 0.0478041 − 0.0139113i.
          With the definitions (9) and (13), it is straightforward to show that the usual laws of
        exponents are valid for the complex exponential function. You can also use Eq. (13)
        to verify that the differentiation formula
                                                      d rt
                                                         (e ) = rert                                (14)
                                                      dt
        holds for complex values of r.
        Find the general solution of the differential equation
EXAMPLE
                                                 y + y + 9.25y = 0,                               (15)
   1
        Also find the solution that satisfies the initial conditions
                                               y(0) = 2,       y (0) = 8,                           (16)
        and draw its graph.
          The characteristic equation for Eq. (15) is
                                                   r 2 + r + 9.25 = 0
        so its roots are
                                          r1 = − 21 + 3i,       r2 = − 21 − 3i.
        Therefore, two solutions of Eq. (15) are
                                                           
                                y1 (t) = exp − 21 + 3i t = e−t/2 (cos 3t + i sin 3t)                 (17)
        and
                                                           
                               y2 (t) = exp     − 21 − 3i t = e−t/2 (cos 3t − i sin 3t).             (18)
        You can verify that the Wronskian W(y1 , y2 )(t) = −6ie−t , which is not zero, so the general
        solution of Eq. (15) can be expressed as a linear combination of y1 (t) and y2 (t) with arbitrary
        coefficients.
           However, the initial value problem (15), (16) has only real coefficients, and it is often
        desirable to express the solution of such a problem in terms of real-valued functions.
        To do this we can make use of Theorem 3.2.6, which states that the real and imaginary parts of
a complex-valued solution of Eq. (15) are also solutions of Eq. (15). Thus, starting from either
y1 (t) or y2 (t), we obtain
                               u(t) = e−t/2 cos 3t,       v(t) = e−t/2 sin 3t                        (19)
as real-valued solutions5 of Eq. (15). On calculating the Wronskian of u(t) and v(t), we find
that W(u, v)(t) = 3e−t , which is not zero; thus u(t) and v(t) form a fundamental set of solutions,
and the general solution of Eq. (15) can be written as
                           y = c1 u(t) + c2 v(t) = e−t/2 (c1 cos 3t + c2 sin 3t),                    (20)
where c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants.
    To satisfy the initial conditions (16), we first substitute t = 0 and y = 2 in Eq. (20) with the
result that c1 = 2. Then, by differentiating Eq. (20), setting t = 0, and setting y = 8, we obtain
− 21 c1 + 3c2 = 8, so that c2 = 3. Thus the solution of the initial value problem (15), (16) is
                                      y = e−t/2 (2 cos 3t + 3 sin 3t).                               (21)
The graph of this solution is shown in Figure 3.3.1.
    From the graph we see that the solution of this problem is a decaying oscillation. The sine
and cosine factors control the oscillatory nature of the solution, and the negative exponential
factor in each term causes the magnitude of the oscillations to diminish as time increases.
               y
               3
               2
               1
                              2              4               6              8           10 t
             –1
                   FIGURE 3.3.1 Solution of the initial value problem (15), (16):
                              y + y + 9.25y = 0, y(0) = 2, y (0) = 8.
Complex Roots; The General Case. The functions y1 (t) and y2 (t), given by Eqs. (5) and
with the meaning expressed by Eq. (13), are solutions of Eq. (1) when the roots of
the characteristic equation (2) are complex numbers λ ± iμ. However, the solutions
y1 and y2 are complex-valued functions, whereas in general we would prefer to have
5 If you are not completely sure that u(t) and v(t) are solutions of the given differential equation, you
should substitute these functions into Eq. (15) and confirm that they satisfy it.
        real-valued solutions because the differential equation itself has real coefficients. Just
        as in Example 1, we can use Theorem 3.2.6 to find a fundamental set of real-valued
        solutions by choosing the real and imaginary parts of either y1 (t) or y2 (t). In this way
        we obtain the solutions
                                    u(t) = eλt cos μt,          v(t) = eλt sin μt.                  (22)
           By direct computation you can show that the Wronskian of u and v is
                                               W(u, v)(t) = μe2λt .                                 (23)
        Thus, as long as μ  = 0, the Wronskian W is not zero, so u and v form a fundamental
        set of solutions. (Of course, if μ = 0, then the roots are real and the discussion in this
        section is not applicable.) Consequently, if the roots of the characteristic equation
        are complex numbers λ ± iμ, with μ  = 0, then the general solution of Eq. (1) is
                                         y = c1 eλt cos μt + c2 eλt sin μt,                         (24)
        where c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants. Note that the solution (24) can be written
        down as soon as the values of λ and μ are known. Let us now consider some further
        examples.
        Find the solution of the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                               16y − 8y + 145y = 0,         y(0) = −2,       y (0) = 1.          (25)
   2
           The characteristic equation is 16r 2 − 8r + 145 = 0 and its roots are r = 1/4 ± 3i. Thus the
        general solution of the differential equation is
                                           y = c1 et/4 cos 3t + c2 et/4 sin 3t.                      (26)
        To apply the first initial condition, we set t = 0 in Eq. (26); this gives
                                                   y(0) = c1 = −2.
        For the second initial condition, we must differentiate Eq. (26) and then set t = 0. In this way
        we find that
                                              y (0) = 14 c1 + 3c2 = 1,
        from which c2 = 1/2. Using these values of c1 and c2 in Eq. (26), we obtain
                                           y = −2et/4 cos 3t + 21 et/4 sin 3t                        (27)
        as the solution of the initial value problem (25). The graph of this solution is shown in
        Figure 3.3.2.
           In this case we observe that the solution is a growing oscillation. Again the trigonometric
        factors in Eq. (27) determine the oscillatory part of the solution, while the exponential factor
        (with a positive exponent this time) causes the magnitude of the oscillation to increase with
        time.
                          y
                         10                                          1 t/4
                                                y = –2e t/4 cos 3t +   e sin 3t
                                                                     2
                           5
                                          2                4               6         8 t
                         –5
                        –10
                         FIGURE 3.3.2 Solution of the initial value problem (25):
                                16y − 8y + 145y = 0, y(0) = −2, y (0) = 1.
        Find the general solution of
EXAMPLE                                            y + 9y = 0.                                   (28)
   3
          The characteristic equation is r 2 + 9 = 0 with the roots r = ±3i; thus λ = 0 and μ = 3. The
        general solution is
                                             y = c1 cos 3t + c2 sin 3t;                            (29)
                   y
                   3
                   2
                   1
                                  2              4               6           8          10 t
                  –1
                  –2
                  –3
                       FIGURE 3.3.3 Two typical solutions of Eq. (28): y + 9y = 0.
         note that if the real part of the roots is zero, as in this example, then there is no exponential
         factor in the solution. Figure 3.3.3 shows the graph of two typical solutions of Eq. (28). In each
         case the solution is a pure oscillation whose amplitude is determined by the initial conditions.
         Since there is no exponential factor in the solution (29), the amplitude of each oscillation
         remains constant in time.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, use Euler’s formula to write the given expression in the form
         a + ib.
          1. exp(1 + 2i)                                     2. exp(2 − 3i)
               iπ
          3. e                                               4. e2−(π/2)i
          5. 2 1−i
                                                             6. π−1+2i
         In each of Problems 7 through 16, find the general solution of the given differential equation.
          7. y − 2y + 2y = 0                              8. y − 2y + 6y = 0
          9. y + 2y − 8y = 0                            10. y + 2y + 2y = 0
                     
         11. y + 6y + 13y = 0                              12. 4y + 9y = 0
                     
         13. y + 2y + 1.25y = 0                            14. 9y + 9y − 4y = 0
                   
         15. y + y + 1.25y = 0                             16. y + 4y + 6.25y = 0
         In each of Problems 17 through 22, find the solution of the given initial value problem. Sketch
         the graph of the solution and describe its behavior for increasing t.
         17. y + 4y = 0,      y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1
                     
         18. y + 4y + 5y = 0,           y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0
                     
         19. y − 2y + 5y = 0,           y(π/2) = 0, y (π/2) = 2
               
         20. y + y = 0,        y(π/3) = 2, y (π/3) = −4
         21. y + y + 1.25y = 0,        y(0) = 3, y (0) = 1
                     
         22. y + 2y + 2y = 0,           y(π/4) = 2, y (π/4) = −2
         23. Consider the initial value problem
                                       3u − u + 2u = 0,     u(0) = 2,      u (0) = 0.
             (a) Find the solution u(t) of this problem.
             (b) For t > 0, find the first time at which |u(t)| = 10.
         24. Consider the initial value problem
                                     5u + 2u + 7u = 0,       u(0) = 2,     u (0) = 1.
             (a) Find the solution u(t) of this problem.
             (b) Find the smallest T such that |u(t)| ≤ 0.1 for all t > T.
         25. Consider the initial value problem
                                    y + 2y + 6y = 0,     y(0) = 2,     y (0) = α ≥ 0.
             (a) Find the solution y(t) of this problem.
             (b) Find α such that y = 0 when t = 1.
             (c) Find, as a function of α, the smallest positive value of t for which y = 0.
             (d) Determine the limit of the expression found in part (c) as α → ∞.
26. Consider the initial value problem
                          y + 2ay + (a2 + 1)y = 0,          y(0) = 1,     y (0) = 0.
    (a) Find the solution y(t) of this problem.
    (b) For a = 1 find the smallest T such that |y(t)| < 0.1 for t > T.
    (c) Repeat part (b) for a = 1/4, 1/2, and 2.
    (d) Using the results of parts (b) and (c), plot T versus a and describe the relation between
    T and a.
27. Show that W(eλt cos μt, eλt sin μt) = μe2λt .
28. In this problem we outline a different derivation of Euler’s formula.
    (a) Show that y1 (t) = cos t and y2 (t) = sin t are a fundamental set of solutions of
    y + y = 0; that is, show that they are solutions and that their Wronskian is not zero.
    (b) Show (formally) that y = eit is also a solution of y + y = 0. Therefore,
                                            eit = c1 cos t + c2 sin t                                (i)
    for some constants c1 and c2 . Why is this so?
    (c) Set t = 0 in Eq. (i) to show that c1 = 1.
    (d) Assuming that Eq. (14) is true, differentiate Eq. (i) and then set t = 0 to conclude that
    c2 = i. Use the values of c1 and c2 in Eq. (i) to arrive at Euler’s formula.
29. Using Euler’s formula, show that
                              cos t = (eit + e−it )/2,     sin t = (eit − e−it )/2i.
30. If ert is given by Eq. (13), show that e(r1 +r2 )t = er1 t er2 t for any complex numbers r1 and r2 .
31. If ert is given by Eq. (13), show that
                                                   d rt
                                                      e = rert
                                                   dt
    for any complex number r.
32. Consider the differential equation
                                             ay + by + cy = 0,
    where b2 − 4ac < 0 and the characteristic equation has complex roots λ ± iμ. Substitute
    the functions
                                 u(t) = eλt cos μt and v(t) = eλt sin μt
    for y in the differential equation and thereby confirm that they are solutions.
33. If the functions y1 and y2 are a fundamental set of solutions of y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,
    show that between consecutive zeros of y1 there is one and only one zero of y2 . Note
    that this result is illustrated by the solutions y1 (t) = cos t and y2 (t) = sin t of the equation
    y + y = 0.
    Hint: Suppose that t1 and t2 are two zeros of y1 between which there are no zeros of y2 .
    Apply Rolle’s theorem to y1 /y2 to reach a contradiction.
Change of Variables. Sometimes a differential equation with variable coefficients,
                                        y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,                                    (i)
can be put in a more suitable form for finding a solution by making a change of the independent
variable. We explore these ideas in Problems 34 through 46. In particular, in Problem 34 we
show that a class of equations known as Euler equations can be transformed into equations
with constant coefficients by a simple change of the independent variable. Problems 35 through
42 are examples of this type of equation. Problem 43 determines conditions under which the
more general Eq. (i) can be transformed into a differential equation with constant coefficients.
Problems 44 through 46 give specific applications of this procedure.
34. Euler Equations. An equation of the form
                                     d2 y       dy
                                  t2       + αt      + βy = 0,           t > 0,                 (ii)
                                     dt 2        dt
     where α and β are real constants, is called an Euler equation.
     (a) Let x = ln t and calculate dy/dt and d2 y/dt 2 in terms of dy/dx and d2 y/dx2 .
     (b) Use the results of part (a) to transform Eq. (ii) into
                                       d2 y               dy
                                             + (α − 1)         + βy = 0.                       (iii)
                                       dx2                dx
     Observe that Eq. (iii) has constant coefficients. If y1 (x) and y2 (x) form a fundamental set
     of solutions of Eq. (iii), then y1 (ln t) and y2 (ln t) form a fundamental set of solutions of
     Eq. (ii).
In each of Problems 35 through 42, use the method of Problem 34 to solve the given equation
for t > 0.
35. t 2 y + ty + y = 0                              36. t 2 y + 4ty + 2y = 0
      2         
37. t y + 3ty + 1.25y = 0                              38. t 2 y − 4ty − 6y = 0
      2         
39. t y − 4ty + 6y = 0                                 40. t 2 y − ty + 5y = 0
41. t 2 y + 3ty − 3y = 0                            42. t 2 y + 7ty + 10y = 0
43. In this problem we determine conditions on p and q that enable Eq. (i) to be transformed
     into an equation with constant coefficients by a change of the independent variable. Let
     x = u(t) be the new independent variable, with the relation between x and t to be specified
     later.
     (a) Show that
                                                           
                            dy    dx dy           d2 y        dx 2 d2 y d2 x dy
                                =          ,         2
                                                        =                  + 2        .
                            dt    dt dx           dt           dt     dx2     dt dx
     (b) Show that the differential equation (i) becomes
                                 2          
                               dx   d2 y       d2 x          dx     dy
                                          +          + p(t)              + q(t)y = 0.          (iv)
                               dt   dx2        dt 2           dt    dx
     (c) In order for Eq. (iv) to have constant coefficients, the coefficients of d2 y/dx2 and of
     y must be proportional. If q(t) > 0, then we can choose the constant of proportionality to
     be 1; hence                                        
                                          x = u(t) =       [q(t)]1/2 dt.                        (v)
     (d) With x chosen as in part (c), show that the coefficient of dy/dx in Eq. (iv) is also a
     constant, provided that the expression
                                              q (t) + 2p(t)q(t)
                                                                                               (vi)
                                                    2[q(t)]3/2
     is a constant. Thus Eq. (i) can be transformed into an equation with constant coefficients
     by a change of the independent variable, provided that the function (q + 2pq)/q3/2 is a
     constant. How must this result be modified if q(t) < 0?
              In each of Problems 44 through 46, try to transform the given equation into one with constant
              coefficients by the method of Problem 43. If this is possible, find the general solution of the
              given equation.
                                   2
              44. y + ty + e−t y = 0,        −∞ < t < ∞
                           
              45. y + 3ty + t y = 0,
                                 2
                                               −∞ < t < ∞
              46. ty + (t 2 − 1)y + t 3 y = 0,    0<t<∞
3.4 Repeated Roots; Reduction of Order
              In earlier sections we showed how to solve the equation
                                                       ay + by + cy = 0                                       (1)
              when the roots of the characteristic equation
                                                         ar 2 + br + c = 0                                       (2)
              either are real and different or are complex conjugates. Now we consider the third
              possibility, namely, that the two roots r1 and r2 are equal. This case is transitional
              between the other two and occurs when the discriminant b2 − 4ac is zero. Then it
              follows from the quadratic formula that
                                                        r1 = r2 = −b/2a.                                         (3)
              The difficulty is immediately apparent; both roots yield the same solution
                                                          y1 (t) = e−bt/2a                                       (4)
              of the differential equation (1), and it is not obvious how to find a second solution.
              Solve the differential equation
   EXAMPLE                                               y + 4y + 4y = 0.                                     (5)
      1           The characteristic equation is
                                                   r 2 + 4r + 4 = (r + 2)2 = 0,
              so r1 = r2 = −2. Therefore, one solution of Eq. (5) is y1 (t) = e−2t . To find the general solution
              of Eq. (5), we need a second solution that is not a constant multiple of y1 . This second solution
              can be found in several ways (see Problems 20 through 22); here we use a method originated
              by D’Alembert6 in the eighteenth century. Recall that since y1 (t) is a solution of Eq. (1), so is
              cy1 (t) for any constant c. The basic idea is to generalize this observation by replacing c by a
              6 Jean d’Alembert (1717–1783), a French mathematician, was a contemporary of Euler and Daniel
              Bernoulli and is known primarily for his work in mechanics and differential equations. D’Alembert’s
              principle in mechanics and d’Alembert’s paradox in hydrodynamics are named for him, and the wave
              equation first appeared in his paper on vibrating strings in 1747. In his later years he devoted himself
              primarily to philosophy and to his duties as science editor of Diderot’s Encyclopédie.
function v(t) and then trying to determine v(t) so that the product v(t)y1 (t) is also a solution
of Eq. (1).
   To carry out this program,we substitute y = v(t)y1 (t) in Eq. (5) and use the resulting equation
to find v(t). Starting with
                                           y = v(t)y1 (t) = v(t)e−2t ,                          (6)
we have
                                          y = v (t)e−2t − 2v(t)e−2t                           (7)
and
                                 y = v (t)e−2t − 4v (t)e−2t + 4v(t)e−2t .                  (8)
By substituting the expressions in Eqs. (6), (7), and (8) in Eq. (5) and collecting terms, we
obtain
                      [v (t) − 4v (t) + 4v(t) + 4v (t) − 8v(t) + 4v(t)]e−2t = 0,
which simplifies to
                                                   v (t) = 0.                                 (9)
Therefore,
                                                   v (t) = c1
and
                                                v(t) = c1 t + c2 ,                             (10)
where c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants. Finally, substituting for v(t) in Eq. (6), we obtain
                                             y = c1 te−2t + c2 e−2t .                          (11)
The second term on the right side of Eq. (11) corresponds to the original solution
y1 (t) = exp(−2t), but the first term arises from a second solution, namely, y2 (t) = t exp(−2t).
We can verify that these two solutions form a fundamental set by calculating their Wronskian:
                                               −2t                     
                                               e               te−2t   
                            W(y1 , y2 )(t) =                          
                                               −2e−2t (1 − 2t)e−2t 
                                            = e−4t − 2te−4t + 2te−4t = e−4t  = 0.
Therefore,
                                       y1 (t) = e−2t ,      y2 (t) = te−2t                     (12)
form a fundamental set of solutions of Eq. (5), and the general solution of that equation is given
by Eq. (11). Note that both y1 (t) and y2 (t) tend to zero as t → ∞; consequently, all solutions
of Eq. (5) behave in this way. The graph of a typical solution is shown in Figure 3.4.1.
                  y
                  2
                  1
                                 0.5             1            1.5             2      t
                                                                              
               FIGURE 3.4.1 A typical solution of Eq. (5): y + 4y + 4y = 0.
   The procedure used in Example 1 can be extended to a general equation whose
characteristic equation has repeated roots. That is, we assume that the coefficients in
Eq. (1) satisfy b2 − 4ac = 0, in which case
                                         y1 (t) = e−bt/2a
is a solution. To find a second solution, we assume that
                                  y = v(t)y1 (t) = v(t)e−bt/2a                           (13)
and substitute for y in Eq. (1) to determine v(t). We have
                                                        b
                               y = v (t)e−bt/2a −         v(t)e−bt/2a                  (14)
                                                        2a
and
                                             b                   b2
                   y = v (t)e−bt/2a −      v (t)e−bt/2a + 2 v(t)e−bt/2a .            (15)
                                             a                    4a
Then, by substituting in Eq. (1), we obtain
                                                                         
                  b          b2                            b
       a v (t) − v (t) + 2 v(t) + b v (t) − v(t) + cv(t) e−bt/2a = 0.
                                                 
                                                                                         (16)
                  a           4a                           2a
Canceling the factor exp(−bt/2a), which is nonzero, and rearranging the remaining
terms, we find that
                                                      2
                                                   b        b2
                   av (t) + (−b + b)v (t) +                −      + c v(t) = 0.          (17)
                                                      4a 2a
The term involving v (t) is obviously zero. Further, the coefficient of v(t) is
c − (b2 /4a), which is also zero because b2 − 4ac = 0 in the problem that we are
considering. Thus, just as in Example 1, Eq. (17) reduces to
                                             v (t) = 0,
so
                                         v(t) = c1 + c2 t.
Hence, from Eq. (13), we have
                                   y = c1 e−bt/2a + c2 te−bt/2a .                        (18)
Thus y is a linear combination of the two solutions
                            y1 (t) = e−bt/2a ,         y2 (t) = te−bt/2a .               (19)
The Wronskian of these two solutions is
                                                                           
                                   e−bt/2a                 te−bt/2a        
                                                                           
                                                                          
                W(y1 , y2 )(t) =  b −bt/2a                   bt             = e−bt/a . (20)
                                  − e                  1−         e −bt/2a 
                                   2a                        2a            
Since W(y1 , y2 )(t) is never zero, the solutions y1 and y2 given by Eq. (19) are a
fundamental set of solutions. Further, Eq. (18) is the general solution of Eq. (1)
when the roots of the characteristic equation are equal. In other words, in this case
there is one exponential solution corresponding to the repeated root and a second
solution that is obtained by multiplying the exponential solution by t.
        Find the solution of the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                   y − y + 0.25y = 0,         y(0) = 2,    y (0) = 13 .             (21)
   2
           The characteristic equation is
                                                    r 2 − r + 0.25 = 0,
        so the roots are r1 = r2 = 1/2. Thus the general solution of the differential equation is
                                                   y = c1 et/2 + c2 tet/2 .                             (22)
        The first initial condition requires that
                                                       y(0) = c1 = 2.
        To satisfy the second initial condition, we first differentiate Eq. (22) and then set t = 0. This
        gives
                                                 y (0) = 21 c1 + c2 = 13 ,
        so c2 = −2/3. Thus the solution of the initial value problem is
                                                    y = 2et/2 − 23 tet/2 .                              (23)
        The graph of this solution is shown by the blue curve in Figure 3.4.2.
                                        y
                                        4
                                                          y'(0) = 2: y = 2et/2 + te t/2
                                        3
                                                          y'(0) = 1 : y = 2et/2 – 2 te t/2
                                                                  3                3
                                        2
                                        1
                                                       1            2            3         t
                                       –1
                        FIGURE 3.4.2 Solutions of y − y + 0.25y = 0, y(0) = 2, with
                    y (0) = 1/3 (blue curve) and with y (0) = 2 (black curve), respectively.
                      
           Let us now modify the initial value problem (21) by changing the initial slope; to be specific,
        let the second initial condition be y (0) = 2. The solution of this modified problem is
                                                     y = 2et/2 + tet/2 ,
        and its graph is shown by the black curve in Figure 3.4.2. The graphs shown in this figure suggest
        that there is a critical initial slope, with a value between 13 and 2, that separates solutions that
        grow positively from those that ultimately grow negatively. In Problem 16 you are asked to
        determine this critical initial slope.
   The geometrical behavior of solutions is similar in this case to that when the
roots are real and different. If the exponents are either positive or negative, then
the magnitude of the solution grows or decays accordingly; the linear factor t has
little influence. A decaying solution is shown in Figure 3.4.1 and growing solutions in
Figure 3.4.2. However, if the repeated root is zero, then the differential equation is
y = 0 and the general solution is a linear function of t.
Summary. We can now summarize the results that we have obtained for second order
linear homogeneous equations with constant coefficients
                                         ay + by + cy = 0.                             (1)
Let r1 and r2 be the roots of the corresponding characteristic equation
                                           ar 2 + br + c = 0.                             (2)
   If r1 and r2 are real but not equal, then the general solution of the differential
equation (1) is
                                          y = c1 er1 t + c2 er2 t .                      (24)
   If r1 and r2 are complex conjugates λ ± iμ, then the general solution is
                                 y = c1 eλt cos μt + c2 eλt sin μt.                      (25)
   If r1 = r2 , then the general solution is
                                          y = c1 er1 t + c2 ter1 t .                     (26)
Reduction of Order. It is worth noting that the procedure used in this section for equa-
tions with constant coefficients is more generally applicable. Suppose that we know
one solution y1 (t), not everywhere zero, of
                                      y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0.                          (27)
To find a second solution, let
                                             y = v(t)y1 (t);                             (28)
then
                                    y = v (t)y1 (t) + v(t)y1 (t)
and
                           y = v (t)y1 (t) + 2v (t)y1 (t) + v(t)y1 (t).
Substituting for y, y , and y in Eq. (27) and collecting terms, we find that
                       y1 v + (2y1 + py1 )v + (y1 + py1 + qy1 )v = 0.             (29)
Since y1 is a solution of Eq. (27), the coefficient of v in Eq. (29) is zero, so that Eq. (29)
becomes
                                    y1 v + (2y1 + py1 )v = 0.                        (30)
         Despite its appearance, Eq. (30) is actually a first order equation for the function v
         and can be solved either as a first order linear equation or as a separable equation.
         Once v has been found, then v is obtained by an integration. Finally, y is determined
         from Eq. (28). This procedure is called the method of reduction of order, because the
         crucial step is the solution of a first order differential equation for v rather than
         the original second order equation for y. Although it is possible to write down a
         formula for v(t), we will instead illustrate how this method works by an example.
         Given that y1 (t) = t −1 is a solution of
 EXAMPLE
                                                 2t 2 y + 3ty − y = 0,         t > 0,                  (31)
    3
         find a fundamental set of solutions.
            We set y = v(t)t −1 ; then
                                   y = v t −1 − vt −2 ,        y = v t −1 − 2v t −2 + 2vt −3 .
         Substituting for y, y , and y in Eq. (31) and collecting terms, we obtain
                                 2t 2 (v t −1 − 2v t −2 + 2vt −3 ) + 3t(v t −1 − vt −2 ) − vt −1
                                                = 2tv + (−4 + 3)v + (4t −1 − 3t −1 − t −1 )v
                                                = 2tv − v = 0.                                         (32)
         Note that the coefficient of v is zero, as it should be; this provides a useful check on our algebraic
         calculations.
            If we let w = v , then Eq. (32) becomes
                                                             2tw − w = 0.
         Separating the variables and solving for w(t), we find that
                                                          w(t) = v (t) = ct 1/2 ;
         then
                                                           v(t) = 23 ct 3/2 + k.
         It follows that
                                                    y = v(t)t −1 = 23 ct 1/2 + kt −1 ,                    (33)
         where c and k are arbitrary constants. The second term on the right side of Eq. (33) is a multiple
         of y1 (t) and can be dropped, but the first term provides a new solution y2 (t) = t 1/2 . You can
         verify that the Wronskian of y1 and y2 is
                                             W(y1 , y2 )(t) = 23 t −3/2  = 0   for    t > 0.             (34)
         Consequently, y1 and y2 form a fundamental set of solutions of Eq. (31) for t > 0.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 10, find the general solution of the given differential equation.
           1. y − 2y + y = 0                                        2. 9y + 6y + y = 0
                      
           3. 4y − 4y − 3y = 0                                         4. 4y + 12y + 9y = 0
                    
           5. y − 2y + 10y = 0                                         6. y − 6y + 9y = 0
 7. 4y + 17y + 4y = 0                           8. 16y + 24y + 9y = 0
 9. 25y − 20y + 4y = 0                         10. 2y + 2y + y = 0
In each of Problems 11 through 14, solve the given initial value problem. Sketch the graph of
the solution and describe its behavior for increasing t.
11. 9y − 12y + 4y = 0,        y(0) = 2, y (0) = −1
          
12. y − 6y + 9y = 0,          y(0) = 0, y (0) = 2
            
13. 9y + 6y + 82y = 0,           y(0) = −1, y (0) = 2
14. y + 4y + 4y = 0,       y(−1) = 2, y (−1) = 1
15. Consider the initial value problem
                          4y + 12y + 9y = 0,      y(0) = 1,    y (0) = −4.
    (a) Solve the initial value problem and plot its solution for 0 ≤ t ≤ 5.
    (b) Determine where the solution has the value zero.
    (c) Determine the coordinates (t0 , y0 ) of the minimum point.
    (d) Change the second initial condition to y (0) = b and find the solution as a function
    of b. Then find the critical value of b that separates solutions that always remain positive
    from those that eventually become negative.
16. Consider the following modification of the initial value problem in Example 2:
                            y − y + 0.25y = 0,     y(0) = 2,    y (0) = b.
    Find the solution as a function of b, and then determine the critical value of b that
    separates solutions that grow positively from those that eventually grow negatively.
17. Consider the initial value problem
                             4y + 4y + y = 0,     y(0) = 1,    y (0) = 2.
    (a) Solve the initial value problem and plot the solution.
    (b) Determine the coordinates (tM , yM ) of the maximum point.
    (c) Change the second initial condition to y (0) = b > 0 and find the solution as a function
    of b.
    (d) Find the coordinates (tM , yM ) of the maximum point in terms of b. Describe the
    dependence of tM and yM on b as b increases.
18. Consider the initial value problem
                        9y + 12y + 4y = 0,      y(0) = a > 0,      y (0) = −1.
    (a) Solve the initial value problem.
    (b) Find the critical value of a that separates solutions that become negative from those
    that are always positive.
19. Consider the equation ay + by + cy = 0. If the roots of the corresponding characteristic
    equation are real, show that a solution to the differential equation either is everywhere
    zero or else can take on the value zero at most once.
Problems 20 through 22 indicate other ways of finding the second solution when the
characteristic equation has repeated roots.
20. (a) Consider the equation y + 2ay + a2 y = 0. Show that the roots of the characteristic
    equation are r1 = r2 = −a, so that one solution of the equation is e−at .
    (b) Use Abel’s formula [Eq. (23) of Section 3.2] to show that the Wronskian of any two
    solutions of the given equation is
                                    W(t) = y1 (t)y2 (t) − y1 (t)y2 (t) = c1 e−2at ,
    where c1 is a constant.
    (c) Let y1 (t) = e−at and use the result of part (b) to obtain a differential equation satisfied
    by a second solution y2 (t). By solving this equation, show that y2 (t) = te−at .
21. Suppose that r1 and r2 are roots of ar 2 + br + c = 0 and that r1  = r2 ; then exp(r1 t)
    and exp(r2 t) are solutions of the differential equation ay + by + cy = 0. Show that
    φ(t; r1 , r2 ) = [exp(r2 t) − exp(r1 t)]/(r2 − r1 ) is also a solution of the equation for r2  = r1 .
    Then think of r1 as fixed, and use L’Hôpital’s rule to evaluate the limit of φ(t; r1 , r2 ) as
    r2 → r1 , thereby obtaining the second solution in the case of equal roots.
22. (a) If ar 2 + br + c = 0 has equal roots r1 , show that
                                  L[ert ] = a(ert ) + b(ert ) + cert = a(r − r1 )2 ert .           (i)
    Since the right side of Eq. (i) is zero when r = r1 , it follows that exp(r1 t) is a solution of
    L[y] = ay + by + cy = 0.
    (b) Differentiate Eq. (i) with respect to r, and interchange differentiation with respect to
    r and with respect to t, thus showing that
                                               
                         ∂                 ∂ rt
                           L[ert ] = L        e = L[tert ] = atert (r − r1 )2 + 2aert (r − r1 ).     (ii)
                        ∂r                 ∂r
    Since the right side of Eq. (ii) is zero when r = r1 , conclude that t exp(r1 t) is also a solution
    of L[y] = 0.
In each of Problems 23 through 30, use the method of reduction of order to find a second
solution of the given differential equation.
23. t 2 y − 4ty + 6y = 0, t > 0;             y1 (t) = t 2
      2           
24. t y + 2ty − 2y = 0, t > 0;                  y1 (t) = t
25. t 2 y + 3ty + y = 0, t > 0;             y1 (t) = t −1
26. t 2 y − t(t + 2)y + (t + 2)y = 0, t > 0;                 y1 (t) = t
             
27. xy − y + 4x y = 0, x > 0;
                      3
                                                y1 (x) = sin x2
                      
28. (x − 1)y − xy + y = 0, x > 1;                      y1 (x) = ex
                                                                          √
       2 
29. x y − (x − 0.1875)y = 0, x > 0;                      y1 (x) = x1/4 e2 x
30. x2 y + xy + (x2 − 0.25)y = 0, x > 0;                   y1 (x) = x−1/2 sin x
31. The differential equation
                                                   y + δ(xy + y) = 0
    arises in the study of the turbulent flow of a uniform stream past a circular cylinder. Verify
    that y1 (x) = exp(−δx2 /2) is one solution, and then find the general solution in the form of
    an integral.
32. The method of Problem 20 can be extended to second order equations with variable
    coefficients. If y1 is a known nonvanishing solution of y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0, show that a
    second solution y2 satisfies (y2 /y1 ) = W(y1 , y2 )/y21 , where W(y1 , y2 ) is the Wronskian of
    y1 and y2 . Then use Abel’s formula [Eq. (23) of Section 3.2] to determine y2 .
             In each of Problems 33 through 36, use the method of Problem 32 to find a second independent
             solution of the given equation.
             33. t 2 y + 3ty + y = 0, t > 0;       y1 (t) = t −1
                         
             34. ty − y + 4t y = 0, t > 0;
                                   3
                                                      y1 (t) = sin(t 2 )
                                   
             35. (x − 1)y − xy + y = 0, x > 1;               y1 (x) = ex
                    2         
             36. x y + xy + (x − 0.25)y = 0, x > 0;
                                       2
                                                                    y1 (x) = x−1/2 sin x
             Behavior of Solutions as t → ∞. Problems 37 through 39 are concerned with the behavior
             of solutions as t → ∞.
             37. If a, b, and c are positive constants, show that all solutions of ay + by + cy = 0 approach
                 zero as t → ∞.
             38. (a) If a > 0 and c > 0, but b = 0, show that the result of Problem 37 is no longer true, but
                  that all solutions are bounded as t → ∞.
                  (b) If a > 0 and b > 0, but c = 0, show that the result of Problem 37 is no longer true, but
                  that all solutions approach a constant that depends on the initial conditions as t → ∞.
                  Determine this constant for the initial conditions y(0) = y0 , y (0) = y0 .
             39. Show that y = sin t is a solution of
                                             y + (k sin2 t)y + (1 − k cos t sin t)y = 0
                  for any value of the constant k. If 0 < k < 2, show that 1 − k cos t sin t > 0 and k sin2 t ≥ 0.
                 Thus observe that even though the coefficients of this variable-coefficient differential equa-
                 tion are nonnegative (and the coefficient of y is zero only at the points t = 0, π, 2π, . . .),
                  it has a solution that does not approach zero as t → ∞. Compare this situation with the
                  result of Problem 37. Thus we observe a not unusual situation in the study of differential
                  equations: equations that are apparently very similar can have quite different properties.
             Euler Equations. In each of Problems 40 through 45, use the substitution introduced in
             Problem 34 in Section 3.3 to solve the given differential equation.
             40. t 2 y − 3ty + 4y = 0,     t>0
                   2           
             41. t y + 2ty + 0.25y = 0,           t>0
             42. 2t 2 y − 5ty + 5y = 0,      t>0
             43. t 2 y + 3ty + y = 0,    t>0
             44. 4t 2 y − 8ty + 9y = 0,     t>0
                   2           
             45. t y + 5ty + 13y = 0,          t>0
3.5 Nonhomogeneous Equations; Method of Undetermined Coefficients
             We now return to the nonhomogeneous equation
                                            L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),                               (1)
             where p, q, and g are given (continuous) functions on the open interval I.
             The equation
                                              L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0,                                (2)
              in which g(t) = 0 and p and q are the same as in Eq. (1), is called the homogeneous
              equation corresponding to Eq. (1). The following two results describe the structure of
              solutions of the nonhomogeneous equation (1) and provide a basis for constructing
              its general solution.
Theorem 3.5.1 If Y1 and Y2 are two solutions of the nonhomogeneous equation (1), then their
              difference Y1 − Y2 is a solution of the corresponding homogeneous equation (2).
              If, in addition, y1 and y2 are a fundamental set of solutions of Eq. (2), then
                                          Y1 (t) − Y2 (t) = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t),                   (3)
              where c1 and c2 are certain constants.
                 To prove this result, note that Y1 and Y2 satisfy the equations
                                         L[Y1 ](t) = g(t),      L[Y2 ](t) = g(t).                     (4)
              Subtracting the second of these equations from the first, we have
                                        L[Y1 ](t) − L[Y2 ](t) = g(t) − g(t) = 0.                      (5)
              However,
                                             L[Y1 ] − L[Y2 ] = L[Y1 − Y2 ],
              so Eq. (5) becomes
                                                   L[Y1 − Y2 ](t) = 0.                                (6)
              Equation (6) states that Y1 − Y2 is a solution of Eq. (2). Finally, since by Theorem
              3.2.4 all solutions of Eq. (2) can be expressed as linear combinations of a fundamental
              set of solutions, it follows that the solution Y1 − Y2 can be so written. Hence Eq. (3)
              holds and the proof is complete.
Theorem 3.5.2 The general solution of the nonhomogeneous equation (1) can be written in the
              form
                                         y = φ(t) = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) + Y(t),                    (7)
              where y1 and y2 are a fundamental set of solutions of the corresponding homoge-
              neous equation (2), c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants, and Y is some specific solution
              of the nonhomogeneous equation (1).
                 The proof of Theorem 3.5.2 follows quickly from the preceding theorem. Note
              that Eq. (3) holds if we identify Y1 with an arbitrary solution φ of Eq. (1) and Y2 with
              the specific solution Y. From Eq. (3) we thereby obtain
                                            φ(t) − Y(t) = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t),                      (8)
              which is equivalent to Eq. (7). Since φ is an arbitrary solution of Eq. (1),the expression
              on the right side of Eq. (7) includes all solutions of Eq. (1); thus it is natural to call it
              the general solution of Eq. (1).
           In somewhat different words, Theorem 3.5.2 states that to solve the nonhomoge-
        neous equation (1), we must do three things:
        1.  Find the general solution c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) of the corresponding homogeneous equation.
            This solution is frequently called the complementary solution and may be denoted by yc (t).
        2. Find some single solution Y(t) of the nonhomogeneous equation. Often this solution is
            referred to as a particular solution.
        3. Form the sum of the functions found in steps 1 and 2.
           We have already discussed how to find yc (t), at least when the homogeneous equa-
        tion (2) has constant coefficients. Therefore, in the remainder of this section and in
        the next, we will focus on finding a particular solution Y(t) of the nonhomogeneous
        equation (1). There are two methods that we wish to discuss. They are known as
        the method of undetermined coefficients (discussed here) and the method of varia-
        tion of parameters (see Section 3.6). Each has some advantages and some possible
        shortcomings.
        Method of Undetermined Coefficients. The method of undetermined coefficients requires
        us to make an initial assumption about the form of the particular solution Y(t), but
        with the coefficients left unspecified. We then substitute the assumed expression into
        Eq. (1) and attempt to determine the coefficients so as to satisfy that equation. If we
        are successful, then we have found a solution of the differential equation (1) and can
        use it for the particular solution Y(t). If we cannot determine the coefficients, then
        this means that there is no solution of the form that we assumed. In this case we may
        modify the initial assumption and try again.
           The main advantage of the method of undetermined coefficients is that it is straight-
        forward to execute once the assumption is made about the form of Y(t). Its major
        limitation is that it is useful primarily for equations for which we can easily write
        down the correct form of the particular solution in advance. For this reason, this
        method is usually used only for problems in which the homogeneous equation has
        constant coefficients and the nonhomogeneous term is restricted to a relatively small
        class of functions. In particular, we consider only nonhomogeneous terms that consist
        of polynomials, exponential functions, sines, and cosines. Despite this limitation, the
        method of undetermined coefficients is useful for solving many problems that have
        important applications. However, the algebraic details may become tedious, and a
        computer algebra system can be very helpful in practical applications. We will illus-
        trate the method of undetermined coefficients by several simple examples and then
        summarize some rules for using it.
        Find a particular solution of
EXAMPLE
                                               y − 3y − 4y = 3e2t .                             (9)
   1
           We seek a function Y such that the combination Y  (t) − 3Y  (t) − 4Y(t) is equal to 3e2t .
        Since the exponential function reproduces itself through differentiation, the most plausible
        way to achieve the desired result is to assume that Y(t) is some multiple of e2t ,
                                                    Y(t) = Ae2t ,
        where the coefficient A is yet to be determined. To find A, we calculate
                                          Y  (t) = 2Ae2t ,       Y  (t) = 4Ae2t ,
        and substitute for y, y , and y in Eq. (9). We obtain
                                                (4A − 6A − 4A)e2t = 3e2t .
        Hence −6Ae2t must equal 3e2t , so A = −1/2. Thus a particular solution is
                                                       Y(t) = − 21 e2t .                              (10)
        Find a particular solution of
EXAMPLE                                           y − 3y − 4y = 2 sin t.                           (11)
   2       By analogy with Example 1, let us first assume that Y(t) = A sin t, where A is a constant to
        be determined. On substituting in Eq. (11) we obtain
                                       −A sin t − 3A cos t − 4A sin t = 2 sin t,
        or, by rearranging terms,
                                              (2 + 5A) sin t + 3A cos t = 0.                          (12)
        We want Eq. (12) to hold for all t. Thus it must hold for two specific points, such as t = 0
        and t = π/2. At these points Eq. (12) reduces to 3A = 0 and 2 + 5A = 0, respectively. These
        contradictory requirements mean that there is no choice of the constant A that makes
        Eq. (12) true for t = 0 and t = π/2, much less for all t. Thus we conclude that our assumption
        concerning Y(t) is inadequate.
           The appearance of the cosine term in Eq. (12) suggests that we modify our original
        assumption to include a cosine term in Y(t); that is,
                                                 Y(t) = A sin t + B cos t,
        where A and B are to be determined. Then
                             Y  (t) = A cos t − B sin t,       Y  (t) = −A sin t − B cos t.
        By substituting these expressions for y, y , and y in Eq. (11) and collecting terms, we obtain
                             (−A + 3B − 4A) sin t + (−B − 3A − 4B) cos t = 2 sin t.                   (13)
        To satisfy Eq. (13), we must match the coefficients of sin t and cos t on each side of the equation;
        thus A and B must satisfy the equations
                                        −5A + 3B = 2,             −3A − 5B = 0.
        By solving these equations for A and B, we obtain A = −5/17 and B = 3/17; hence a particular
        solution of Eq. (11) is
                                               Y(t) = − 17 5
                                                             sin t + 173 cos t.
           The method illustrated in the preceding examples can also be used when the right
        side of the equation is a polynomial. Thus, to find a particular solution of
                                               y − 3y − 4y = 4t 2 − 1,                             (14)
        we initially assume that Y(t) is a polynomial of the same degree as the nonhomoge-
        neous term; that is, Y(t) = At 2 + Bt + C.
           To summarize our conclusions up to this point: if the nonhomogeneous term g(t)
        in Eq. (1) is an exponential function eαt , then assume that Y(t) is proportional to
        the same exponential function; if g(t) is sin βt or cos βt, then assume that Y(t) is a
        linear combination of sin βt and cos βt; if g(t) is a polynomial, then assume that Y(t)
        is a polynomial of like degree. The same principle extends to the case where g(t) is
        a product of any two, or all three, of these types of functions, as the next example
        illustrates.
        Find a particular solution of
EXAMPLE                                      y − 3y − 4y = −8et cos 2t.                        (15)
   3                                                                    t
           In this case we assume that Y(t) is the product of e and a linear combination of cos 2t and
        sin 2t; that is,
                                            Y(t) = Aet cos 2t + Bet sin 2t.
        The algebra is more tedious in this example, but it follows that
                                  Y  (t) = (A + 2B)et cos 2t + (−2A + B)et sin 2t
        and
                              Y  (t) = (−3A + 4B)et cos 2t + (−4A − 3B)et sin 2t.
        By substituting these expressions in Eq. (15), we find that A and B must satisfy
                                          10A + 2B = 8,            2A − 10B = 0.
        Hence A = 10/13 and B = 2/13; therefore, a particular solution of Eq. (15) is
                                            Y(t) = 10 13
                                                         et cos 2t + 13
                                                                      2 t
                                                                         e sin 2t.
           Now suppose that g(t) is the sum of two terms, g(t) = g1 (t) + g2 (t), and suppose
        that Y1 and Y2 are solutions of the equations
                                                ay + by + cy = g1 (t)                          (16)
        and
                                               ay + by + cy = g2 (t),                          (17)
        respectively. Then Y1 + Y2 is a solution of the equation
                                                ay + by + cy = g(t).                           (18)
        To prove this statement, substitute Y1 (t) + Y2 (t) for y in Eq. (18) and make use
        of Eqs. (16) and (17). A similar conclusion holds if g(t) is the sum of any finite
        number of terms. The practical significance of this result is that for an equation
        whose nonhomogeneous function g(t) can be expressed as a sum, you can consider
        instead several simpler equations and then add the results together. The following
        example is an illustration of this procedure.
        Find a particular solution of
EXAMPLE
                                      y − 3y − 4y = 3e2t + 2 sin t − 8et cos 2t.               (19)
   4
           By splitting up the right side of Eq. (19), we obtain the three equations
                                                 y − 3y − 4y = 3e2t ,
                                                 y − 3y − 4y = 2 sin t,
        and
                                             y − 3y − 4y = −8et cos 2t.
        Solutions of these three equations have been found in Examples 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
        Therefore, a particular solution of Eq. (19) is their sum, namely,
                            Y(t) = − 21 e2t + 173 cos t − 175 sin t + 10 13
                                                                            et cos 2t + 13
                                                                                        2 t
                                                                                           e sin 2t.
           The procedure illustrated in these examples enables us to solve a fairly large class
        of problems in a reasonably efficient manner. However, there is one difficulty that
        sometimes occurs. The next example illustrates how it arises.
        Find a particular solution of
EXAMPLE                                           y − 3y − 4y = 2e−t .                                (20)
   5                                                                             −t
            Proceeding as in Example 1, we assume that Y(t) = Ae . By substituting in Eq. (20), we
        obtain
                                              (A + 3A − 4A)e−t = 2e−t .                                  (21)
        Since the left side of Eq. (21) is zero, there is no choice of A that satisfies this equation.
        Therefore, there is no particular solution of Eq. (20) of the assumed form. The reason for this
        possibly unexpected result becomes clear if we solve the homogeneous equation
                                                    y − 3y − 4y = 0                                   (22)
        that corresponds to Eq. (20). A fundamental set of solutions of Eq. (22) is y1 (t) = e−t and
        y2 (t) = e4t . Thus our assumed particular solution of Eq. (20) is actually a solution of the
        homogeneous equation (22); consequently, it cannot possibly be a solution of the nonho-
        mogeneous equation (20). To find a solution of Eq. (20), we must therefore consider functions
        of a somewhat different form.
           At this stage, we have several possible alternatives. One is simply to try to guess the proper
        form of the particular solution of Eq. (20). Another is to solve this equation in some different
        way and then to use the result to guide our assumptions if this situation arises again in the future;
        see Problems 29 and 35 for other solution methods. Still another possibility is to seek a simpler
        equation where this difficulty occurs and to use its solution to suggest how we might proceed
        with Eq. (20). Adopting the latter approach, we look for a first order equation analogous to
        Eq. (20). One possibility is the linear equation
                                                       y + y = 2e−t .                                   (23)
        If we try to find a particular solution of Eq. (23) of the form Ae−t , we will fail because e−t
        is a solution of the homogeneous equation y + y = 0. However, from Section 2.1 we already
        know how to solve Eq. (23). An integrating factor is μ(t) = et , and by multiplying by μ(t) and
        then integrating both sides, we obtain the solution
                                                     y = 2te−t + ce−t .                                  (24)
        The second term on the right side of Eq. (24) is the general solution of the homogeneous
        equation y + y = 0, but the first term is a solution of the full nonhomogeneous equation (23).
        Observe that it involves the exponential factor e−t multiplied by the factor t. This is the clue
        that we were looking for.
           We now return to Eq. (20) and assume a particular solution of the form Y(t) = Ate−t . Then
                               Y  (t) = Ae−t − Ate−t ,         Y  (t) = −2Ae−t + Ate−t .              (25)
Substituting these expressions for y, y , and y in Eq. (20), we obtain
                             (−2A − 3A)e−t + (A + 3A − 4A)te−t = 2e−t .
The coefficient of te−t is zero, so from the terms involving et we have −5A = 2, or A = −2/5.
Thus a particular solution of Eq. (20) is
                                             Y(t) = − 25 te−t .                                (26)
   The outcome of Example 5 suggests a modification of the principle stated pre-
viously: if the assumed form of the particular solution duplicates a solution of the
corresponding homogeneous equation, then modify the assumed particular solution
by multiplying it by t. Occasionally, this modification will be insufficient to remove
all duplication with the solutions of the homogeneous equation, in which case it is
necessary to multiply by t a second time. For a second order equation, it will never
be necessary to carry the process further than this.
Summary. We now summarize the steps involved in finding the solution of an initial
value problem consisting of a nonhomogeneous equation of the form
                                        ay + by + cy = g(t),                                (27)
where the coefficients a, b, and c are constants, together with a given set of initial
conditions.
1.  Find the general solution of the corresponding homogeneous equation.
2.  Make sure that the function g(t) in Eq. (27) belongs to the class of functions discussed
    in this section; that is, be sure it involves nothing more than exponential functions, sines,
    cosines, polynomials, or sums or products of such functions. If this is not the case, use the
    method of variation of parameters (discussed in the next section).
3. If g(t) = g1 (t) + · · · + gn (t)—that is, if g(t) is a sum of n terms—then form n subproblems,
    each of which contains only one of the terms g1 (t), . . . , gn (t). The ith subproblem consists
    of the equation
                                            ay + by + cy = gi (t),
    where i runs from 1 to n.
4.  For the ith subproblem assume a particular solution Yi (t) consisting of the appropriate
    exponential function, sine, cosine, polynomial, or combination thereof. If there is any
    duplication in the assumed form of Yi (t) with the solutions of the homogeneous equation
    (found in step 1), then multiply Yi (t) by t, or (if necessary) by t 2 , so as to remove the
    duplication. See Table 3.5.1.
5. Find a particular solution Yi (t) for each of the subproblems. Then the sum
    Y1 (t) + · · · + Yn (t) is a particular solution of the full nonhomogeneous equation (27).
6. Form the sum of the general solution of the homogeneous equation (step 1) and the
    particular solution of the nonhomogeneous equation (step 5). This is the general solution
    of the nonhomogeneous equation.
7. Use the initial conditions to determine the values of the arbitrary constants remaining in
    the general solution.
   For some problems this entire procedure is easy to carry out by hand, but often
the algebraic calculations are lengthy. Once you understand clearly how the method
works, a computer algebra system can be of great assistance in executing the details.
   TABLE 3.5.1 The Particular Solution of ay + by + cy = gi (t)
                       gi (t)                                             Yi (t)
       Pn (t) = a0 t + a1 t
                     n       n−1
                                 + · · · + an    t (A0 t + A1 t
                                                   s       n        n−1
                                                                        + · · · + An )
       Pn (t)eαt                                 t s (A0 t n + A1 t n−1 + · · · + An )eαt
                 
                   sin βt
       Pn (t)eαt                                 t s [(A0 t n + A1 t n−1 + · · · + An )eαt cos βt
                   cos βt
                                                        + (B0 t n + B1 t n−1 + · · · + Bn )eαt sin βt]
   Notes. Here s is the smallest nonnegative integer (s = 0, 1, or 2) that will ensure that no
   term in Yi (t) is a solution of the corresponding homogeneous equation. Equivalently,
   for the three cases, s is the number of times 0 is a root of the characteristic equation, α is
   a root of the characteristic equation, and α + iβ is a root of the characteristic equation,
   respectively.
  The method of undetermined coefficients is self-correcting in the sense that if you
assume too little for Y(t), then a contradiction is soon reached that usually points the
way to the modification that is needed in the assumed form. On the other hand, if you
assume too many terms, then some unnecessary work is done and some coefficients
turn out to be zero, but at least the correct answer is obtained.
Proof of the Method of Undetermined Coefficients. In the preceding discussion we have
described the method of undetermined coefficients on the basis of several exam-
ples. To prove that the procedure always works as stated, we now give a general
argument, in which we consider three cases corresponding to different forms for the
nonhomogeneous term g(t).
Case 1: g(t) = Pn (t) = a0 t n + a1 t n−1 + · · · + an . In this case Eq. (27) becomes
                            ay + by + cy = a0 t n + a1 t n−1 + · · · + an .                         (28)
To obtain a particular solution, we assume that
                     Y(t) = A0 t n + A1 t n−1 + · · · + An−2 t 2 + An−1 t + An .                       (29)
Substituting in Eq. (28), we obtain
              a[n(n − 1)A0 t n−2 + · · · + 2An−2 ] + b(nA0 t n−1 + · · · + An−1 )
                  + c(A0 t n + A1 t n−1 + · · · + An ) = a0 t n + · · · + an .                         (30)
                                                                                 n
Equating the coefficients of like powers of t, beginning with t , leads to the following
sequence of equations:
                                                             cA0 = a0 ,
                                                cA1 + nbA0 = a1 ,
                                                                    ..
                                                                     .
                                   cAn + bAn−1 + 2aAn−2 = an .
Provided that c  = 0, the solution of the first equation is A0 = a0 /c, and the remaining
equations determine A1 , . . . , An successively. If c = 0 but b  = 0, then the polynomial
on the left side of Eq. (30) is of degree n − 1, and we cannot satisfy Eq. (30). To be
sure that aY  (t) + bY  (t) is a polynomial of degree n, we must choose Y(t) to be a
polynomial of degree n + 1. Hence we assume that
                                    Y(t) = t(A0 t n + · · · + An ).
There is no constant term in this expression for Y(t), but there is no need to include
such a term since a constant is a solution of the homogeneous equation when c = 0.
Since b  = 0, we have A0 = a0 /b(n + 1), and the other coefficients A1 , . . . , An can be
determined similarly. If both c and b are zero, we assume that
                                   Y(t) = t 2 (A0 t n + · · · + An ).
The term aY  (t) gives rise to a term of degree n, and we can proceed as before. Again
the constant and linear terms in Y(t) are omitted, since in this case they are both
solutions of the homogeneous equation.
Case 2: g(t) = e αt Pn (t). The problem of determining a particular solution of
                                     ay + by + cy = eαt Pn (t)                         (31)
can be reduced to the preceding case by a substitution. Let
                                            Y(t) = eαt u(t);
then
                                     Y  (t) = eαt [u (t) + αu(t)]
and
                            Y  (t) = eαt [u (t) + 2αu (t) + α2 u(t)].
Substituting for y, y , and y in Eq. (31), canceling the factor eαt , and collecting terms,
we obtain
                  au (t) + (2aα + b)u (t) + (aα2 + bα + c)u(t) = Pn (t).               (32)
   The determination of a particular solution of Eq. (32) is precisely the same problem,
except for the names of the constants, as solving Eq. (28). Therefore, if aα2 + bα + c
is not zero, we assume that u(t) = A0 t n + · · · + An ; hence a particular solution of
Eq. (31) is of the form
                            Y(t) = eαt (A0 t n + A1 t n−1 + · · · + An ).                 (33)
On the other hand, if aα2 + bα + c is zero but 2aα + b is not, we must take u(t) to be of
the form t(A0 t n + · · · + An ). The corresponding form for Y(t) is t times the expression
on the right side of Eq. (33). Note that if aα2 + bα + c is zero, then eαt is a solution
of the homogeneous equation. If both aα2 + bα + c and 2aα + b are zero (and this
implies that both eαt and teαt are solutions of the homogeneous equation), then the
correct form for u(t) is t 2 (A0 t n + · · · + An ). Hence Y(t) is t 2 times the expression on
the right side of Eq. (33).
Case 3: g(t) = e αt Pn (t) cos βt or e αt Pn (t) sin βt. These two cases are similar, so we
consider only the latter. We can reduce this problem to the preceding one by noting
that, as a consequence of Euler’s formula, sin βt = (eiβt − e−iβt )/2i. Hence g(t) is of
the form
                                                  e(α+iβ)t − e(α−iβ)t
                                  g(t) = Pn (t)                       ,
                                                           2i
         and we should choose
                            Y(t) = e(α+iβ)t (A0 t n + · · · + An ) + e(α−iβ)t (B0 t n + · · · + Bn ),
         or, equivalently,
                        Y(t) = eαt (A0 t n + · · · + An ) cos βt + eαt (B0 t n + · · · + Bn ) sin βt.
         Usually, the latter form is preferred. If α ± iβ satisfy the characteristic equation cor-
         responding to the homogeneous equation, we must, of course, multiply each of the
         polynomials by t to increase their degrees by one.
            If the nonhomogeneous function involves both cos βt and sin βt, it is usually con-
         venient to treat these terms together, since each one individually may give rise to the
         same form for a particular solution. For example, if g(t) = t sin t + 2 cos t, the form
         for Y(t) would be
                                      Y(t) = (A0 t + A1 ) sin t + (B0 t + B1 ) cos t,
         provided that sin t and cos t are not solutions of the homogeneous equation.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 14, find the general solution of the given differential equation.
          1. y − 2y − 3y = 3e2t                                 2. y + 2y + 5y = 3 sin 2t
                   
          3. y − y − 2y = −2t + 4t           2
                                                                   4. y + y − 6y = 12e3t + 12e−2t
                                      −t
          5. y − 2y − 3y = −3te                                    6. y + 2y = 3 + 4 sin 2t
          7. y + 9y = t 2 e3t + 6                                8. y + 2y + y = 2e−t
                        
          9. 2y + 3y + y = t + 3 sin t
                                    2
                                                                  10. y + y = 3 sin 2t + t cos 2t
               
         11. u + ω0 u = cos ωt,
                       2
                                             ω  = ω0
                                               2      2
                                                                  12. u + ω02 u = cos ω0 t
                   
         13. y + y + 4y = 2 sinh t                                14. y − y − 2y = cosh 2t
                                         −t
              Hint: sinh t = (e − e )/2
                                 t
                                                                      Hint: cosh t = (et + e−t )/2
         In each of Problems 15 through 20, find the solution of the given initial value problem.
         15. y + y − 2y = 2t,            y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1
         16. y + 4y = t 2 + 3et ,          y(0) = 0, y (0) = 2
                      
         17. y − 2y + y = te + 4,  t
                                                  y(0) = 1, y (0) = 1
                      
         18. y − 2y − 3y = 3te ,      2t
                                                 y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0
               
         19. y + 4y = 3 sin 2t,             y(0) = 2, y (0) = −1
         20. y + 2y + 5y = 4e−t cos 2t,              y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0
         In each of Problems 21 through 28:
         (a) Determine a suitable form for Y(t) if the method of undetermined coefficients is to be
         used.
         (b) Use a computer algebra system to find a particular solution of the given equation.
         21. y + 3y = 2t 4 + t 2 e−3t + sin 3t
         22. y + y = t(1 + sin t)
         23. y − 5y + 6y = et cos 2t + e2t (3t + 4) sin t
         24. y + 2y + 2y = 3e−t + 2e−t cos t + 4e−t t 2 sin t
         25. y − 4y + 4y = 2t 2 + 4te2t + t sin 2t
         26. y + 4y = t 2 sin 2t + (6t + 7) cos 2t
27. y + 3y + 2y = et (t 2 + 1) sin 2t + 3e−t cos t + 4et
28. y + 2y + 5y = 3te−t cos 2t − 2te−2t cos t
29. Consider the equation
                                               y − 3y − 4y = 2e−t                           (i)
    from Example 5. Recall that y1 (t) = e−t and y2 (t) = e4t are solutions of the corresponding
    homogeneous equation. Adapting the method of reduction of order (Section 3.4), seek a
    solution of the nonhomogeneous equation of the form Y(t) = v(t)y1 (t) = v(t)e−t , where
    v(t) is to be determined.
    (a) Substitute Y(t), Y  (t), and Y  (t) into Eq. (i) and show that v(t) must satisfy
    v − 5v = 2.
    (b) Let w(t) = v (t) and show that w(t) must satisfy w − 5w = 2. Solve this equation
    for w(t).
    (c) Integrate w(t) to find v(t) and then show that
                                      Y(t) = − 25 te−t + 15 c1 e4t + c2 e−t .
    The first term on the right side is the desired particular solution of the nonhomogeneous
    equation. Note that it is a product of t and e−t .
30. Determine the general solution of
                                                         N
                                           y + λ2 y =       am sin mπt,
                                                         m=1
    where λ > 0 and λ  = mπ for m = 1, . . . , N.
31. In many physical problems the nonhomogeneous term may be specified by different
    formulas in different time periods. As an example, determine the solution y = φ(t) of
                                                    
                                                      t,       0 ≤ t ≤ π,
                                       y + y =
                                                      πeπ−t ,       t > π,
    satisfying the initial conditions y(0) = 0 and y (0) = 1. Assume that y and y are also con-
    tinuous at t = π. Plot the nonhomogeneous term and the solution as functions of time.
    Hint: First solve the initial value problem for t ≤ π; then solve for t > π, determining the
    constants in the latter solution from the continuity conditions at t = π.
32. Follow the instructions in Problem 31 to solve the differential equation
                                                         
                                                           1, 0 ≤ t ≤ π/2,
                                   y + 2y + 5y =
                                                           0,        t > π/2
    with the initial conditions y(0) = 0 and y (0) = 0.
Behavior of Solutions as t → ∞. In Problems 33 and 34, we continue the discussion started
with Problems 37 through 39 of Section 3.4. Consider the differential equation
                                           ay + by + cy = g(t),                             (i)
where a, b, and c are positive.
33. If Y1 (t) and Y2 (t) are solutions of Eq. (i), show that Y1 (t) − Y2 (t) → 0 as t → ∞. Is this
    result true if b = 0?
34. If g(t) = d, a constant, show that every solution of Eq. (i) approaches d/c as t → ∞. What
    happens if c = 0? What if b = 0 also?
                35. In this problem we indicate an alternative procedure7 for solving the differential equation
                                                 y + by + cy = (D2 + bD + c)y = g(t),                           (i)
                      where b and c are constants, and D denotes differentiation with respect to t. Let r1 and r2
                      be the zeros of the characteristic polynomial of the corresponding homogeneous equation.
                     These roots may be real and different, real and equal, or conjugate complex numbers.
                      (a) Verify that Eq. (i) can be written in the factored form
                                                          (D − r1 )(D − r2 )y = g(t),
                      where r1 + r2 = −b and r1 r2 = c.
                      (b) Let u = (D − r2 )y. Then show that the solution of Eq (i) can be found by solving the
                      following two first order equations:
                                                 (D − r1 )u = g(t),       (D − r2 )y = u(t).
                In each of Problems 36 through 39, use the method of Problem 35 to solve the given differential
                equation.
                36. y − 3y − 4y = 3e2t        (see Example 1)
                              
                37. 2y + 3y + y = t + 3 sin t
                                        2
                                                         (see Problem 9)
                38. y + 2y + y = 2e−t        (see Problem 8)
                39. y + 2y = 3 + 4 sin 2t        (see Problem 6)
3.6 Variation of Parameters
                In this section we describe another method of finding a particular solution of a non-
                homogeneous equation. This method, variation of parameters, is due to Lagrange and
                complements the method of undetermined coefficients rather well. The main advan-
                tage of variation of parameters is that it is a general method; in principle at least, it can
                be applied to any equation, and it requires no detailed assumptions about the form
                of the solution. In fact, later in this section we use this method to derive a formula for
                a particular solution of an arbitrary second order linear nonhomogeneous differen-
                tial equation. On the other hand, the method of variation of parameters eventually
                requires us to evaluate certain integrals involving the nonhomogeneous term in the
                differential equation, and this may present difficulties. Before looking at this method
                in the general case, we illustrate its use in an example.
                Find a particular solution of
   EXAMPLE                                                  y + 4y = 3 csc t.                                   (1)
      1            Observe that this problem is not a good candidate for the method of undetermined coeffi-
                cients, as described in Section 3.5, because the nonhomogeneous term g(t) = 3 csc t involves
                7 R. S. Luthar, “Another Approach to a Standard Differential Equation,” Two Year College Mathematics
                Journal 10 (1979), pp. 200–201. Also see D. C. Sandell and F. M. Stein, “Factorization of Operators of
                Second Order Linear Homogeneous Ordinary Differential Equations,” Two Year College Mathematics
                Journal 8 (1977), pp. 132–141, for a more general discussion of factoring operators.
a quotient (rather than a sum or a product) of sin t or cos t. Therefore, we need a different
approach. Observe also that the homogeneous equation corresponding to Eq. (1) is
                                                  y + 4y = 0,                                    (2)
and that the general solution of Eq. (2) is
                                       yc (t) = c1 cos 2t + c2 sin 2t.                             (3)
The basic idea in the method of variation of parameters is to replace the constants c1 and c2
in Eq. (3) by functions u1 (t) and u2 (t), respectively, and then to determine these functions so
that the resulting expression
                                      y = u1 (t) cos 2t + u2 (t) sin 2t                            (4)
is a solution of the nonhomogeneous equation (1).
   To determine u1 and u2 , we need to substitute for y from Eq. (4) in Eq. (1). However, even
without carrying out this substitution, we can anticipate that the result will be a single equation
involving some combination of u1 , u2 , and their first two derivatives. Since there is only one
equation and two unknown functions, we can expect that there are many possible choices of
u1 and u2 that will meet our needs. Alternatively, we may be able to impose a second condition
of our own choosing, thereby obtaining two equations for the two unknown functions u1 and
u2 . We will soon show (following Lagrange) that it is possible to choose this second condition
in a way that makes the computation markedly more efficient.
    Returning now to Eq. (4), we differentiate it and rearrange the terms, thereby obtaining
                    y = −2u1 (t) sin 2t + 2u2 (t) cos 2t + u1 (t) cos 2t + u2 (t) sin 2t.       (5)
Keeping in mind the possibility of choosing a second condition on u1 and u2 , let us require the
sum of the last two terms on the right side of Eq. (5) to be zero; that is, we require that
                                     u1 (t) cos 2t + u2 (t) sin 2t = 0.                          (6)
It then follows from Eq. (5) that
                                  y = −2u1 (t) sin 2t + 2u2 (t) cos 2t.                           (7)
Although the ultimate effect of the condition (6) is not yet clear,at the very least it has simplified
the expression for y . Further, by differentiating Eq. (7) we obtain
                  y = −4u1 (t) cos 2t − 4u2 (t) sin 2t − 2u1 (t) sin 2t + 2u2 (t) cos 2t.      (8)
Then, substituting for y and y in Eq. (1) from Eqs. (4) and (8), respectively, we find that
              y + 4y = − 4u1 (t) cos 2t − 4u2 (t) sin 2t − 2u1 (t) sin 2t + 2u2 (t) cos 2t
                          + 4u1 (t) cos 2t + 4u2 (t) sin 2t = 3 csc t.
Hence u1 and u2 must satisfy
                                −2u1 (t) sin 2t + 2u2 (t) cos 2t = 3 csc t.                      (9)
    Summarizing our results to this point, we want to choose u1 and u2 so as to satisfy Eqs. (6)
and (9). These equations can be viewed as a pair of linear algebraic equations for the two
unknown quantities u1 (t) and u2 (t). Equations (6) and (9) can be solved in various ways. For
example, solving Eq. (6) for u2 (t), we have
                                                              cos 2t
                                           u2 (t) = −u1 (t)        .                           (10)
                                                              sin 2t
Then, substituting for u2 (t) in Eq. (9) and simplifying, we obtain
                                                3 csc t sin 2t
                                  u1 (t) = −                   = −3 cos t.                       (11)
                                                      2
Further, putting this expression for u1 (t) back in Eq. (10) and using the double-angle formulas,
we find that
                              3 cos t cos 2t       3(1 − 2 sin2 t)    3
                    u2 (t) =                   =                  = csc t − 3 sin t.             (12)
                                  sin 2t                2 sin t       2
   Having obtained u1 (t) and u2 (t), we next integrate so as to find u1 (t) and u2 (t). The result is
                                            u1 (t) = −3 sin t + c1                                (13)
and
                              u2 (t) = 23 ln | csc t − cot t| + 3 cos t + c2 .                    (14)
On substituting these expressions in Eq. (4), we have
                   y = −3 sin t cos 2t + 23 ln | csc t − cot t| sin 2t + 3 cos t sin 2t
                                           + c1 cos 2t + c2 sin 2t.
Finally, by using the double-angle formulas once more, we obtain
                   y = 3 sin t + 23 ln | csc t − cot t| sin 2t + c1 cos 2t + c2 sin 2t.           (15)
The terms in Eq. (15) involving the arbitrary constants c1 and c2 are the general solution of the
corresponding homogeneous equation, while the remaining terms are a particular solution of
the nonhomogeneous equation (1). Thus Eq. (15) is the general solution of Eq. (1).
   In the preceding example the method of variation of parameters worked well in
determining a particular solution, and hence the general solution, of Eq. (1). The next
question is whether this method can be applied effectively to an arbitrary equation.
Therefore, we consider
                                      y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),                               (16)
where p, q, and g are given continuous functions. As a starting point, we assume that
we know the general solution
                                       yc (t) = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t)                            (17)
of the corresponding homogeneous equation
                                        y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0.                                (18)
This is a major assumption. So far we have shown how to solve Eq. (18) only if it has
constant coefficients. If Eq. (18) has coefficients that depend on t, then usually the
methods described in Chapter 5 must be used to obtain yc (t).
  The crucial idea, as illustrated in Example 1, is to replace the constants c1 and c2
in Eq. (17) by functions u1 (t) and u2 (t), respectively; thus we have
                                     y = u1 (t)y1 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t).                            (19)
Then we try to determine u1 (t) and u2 (t) so that the expression in Eq. (19) is a solution
of the nonhomogeneous equation (16) rather than the homogeneous equation (18).
Thus we differentiate Eq. (19), obtaining
                   y = u1 (t)y1 (t) + u1 (t)y1 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t).           (20)
              As in Example 1, we now set the terms involving u1 (t) and u2 (t) in Eq. (20) equal to
              zero; that is, we require that
                                                  u1 (t)y1 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t) = 0.                             (21)
              Then, from Eq. (20), we have
                                                 y = u1 (t)y1 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t).                             (22)
              Further, by differentiating again, we obtain
                                y = u1 (t)y1 (t) + u1 (t)y1 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t).         (23)
                 Now we substitute for y, y , and y in Eq. (16) from Eqs. (19), (22), and (23),
              respectively. After rearranging the terms in the resulting equation, we find that
                                                                            
                              u1 (t) y1 (t) + p(t)y1 (t) + q(t)y1 (t)
                                                                                              
                                              + u2 (t) y2 (t) + p(t)y2 (t) + q(t)y2 (t)
                                                                + u1 (t)y1 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t) = g(t).        (24)
              Each of the expressions in square brackets in Eq. (24) is zero because both y1 and y2
              are solutions of the homogeneous equation (18). Therefore, Eq. (24) reduces to
                                                u1 (t)y1 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t) = g(t).                          (25)
              Equations (21) and (25) form a system of two linear algebraic equations for the
              derivatives u1 (t) and u2 (t) of the unknown functions. They correspond exactly to
              Eqs. (6) and (9) in Example 1.
                 By solving the system (21), (25) we obtain
                                                  y2 (t)g(t)                           y1 (t)g(t)
                                  u1 (t) = −                    ,       u2 (t) =                   ,           (26)
                                               W(y1 , y2 )(t)                       W(y1 , y2 )(t)
              where W(y1 , y2 ) is the Wronskian of y1 and y2 . Note that division by W is permissible
              since y1 and y2 are a fundamental set of solutions, and therefore their Wronskian
              is nonzero. By integrating Eqs. (26), we find the desired functions u1 (t) and u2 (t),
              namely,
                                                                                
                                       y2 (t)g(t)                                       y1 (t)g(t)
                    u1 (t) = −                        dt + c1 ,        u2 (t) =                        dt + c2 . (27)
                                    W(y1 , y2 )(t)                                   W(y1 , y2 )(t)
              If the integrals in Eqs. (27) can be evaluated in terms of elementary functions, then we
              substitute the results in Eq. (19), thereby obtaining the general solution of Eq. (16).
              More generally, the solution can always be expressed in terms of integrals, as stated
              in the following theorem.
Theorem 3.6.1 If the functions p, q, and g are continuous on an open interval I, and if the functions
              y1 and y2 are a fundamental set of solutions of the homogeneous equation (18)
              corresponding to the nonhomogeneous equation (16)
                                                 y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),
         then a particular solution of Eq. (16) is
                                            t                                   t
                                                  y2 (s)g(s)                          y1 (s)g(s)
                           Y(t) = −y1 (t)                         ds + y2 (t)                       ds,        (28)
                                             t0 W(y1 , y2 )(s)                    t0 W(y1 , y2 )(s)
         where t0 is any conveniently chosen point in I. The general solution is
                                             y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) + Y(t),                                 (29)
         as prescribed by Theorem 3.5.2.
             By examining the expression (28) and reviewing the process by which we derived
         it, we can see that there may be two major difficulties in using the method of variation
         of parameters. As we have mentioned earlier, one is the determination of y1 (t) and
         y2 (t), a fundamental set of solutions of the homogeneous equation (18), when the
         coefficients in that equation are not constants. The other possible difficulty lies in
         the evaluation of the integrals appearing in Eq. (28). This depends entirely on the
         nature of the functions y1 , y2 , and g. In using Eq. (28), be sure that the differential
         equation is exactly in the form (16); otherwise, the nonhomogeneous term g(t) will
         not be correctly identified.
             A major advantage of the method of variation of parameters is that Eq. (28) pro-
         vides an expression for the particular solution Y(t) in terms of an arbitrary forcing
         function g(t). This expression is a good starting point if you wish to investigate the
         effect of variations in the forcing function, or if you wish to analyze the response of
         a system to a number of different forcing functions.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4, use the method of variation of parameters to find a particular
         solution of the given differential equation. Then check your answer by using the method of
         undetermined coefficients.
           1. y − 5y + 6y = 2et                                 2. y − y − 2y = 2e−t
                                −t
           3. y + 2y + y = 3e                                      4. 4y − 4y + y = 16et/2
         In each of Problems 5 through 12, find the general solution of the given differential equation.
         In Problems 11 and 12, g is an arbitrary continuous function.
           5. y + y = tan t,        0 < t < π/2                  6. y + 9y = 9 sec2 3t,        0 < t < π/6
           7. y + 4y + 4y = t −2 e−2t ,      t>0                8. y + 4y = 3 csc 2t,       0 < t < π/2
           9. 4y + y = 2 sec(t/2),         −π < t < π           10. y − 2y + y = et /(1 + t 2 )
                      
         11. y − 5y + 6y = g(t)                                   12. y + 4y = g(t)
         In each of Problems 13 through 20, verify that the given functions y1 and y2 satisfy the corre-
         sponding homogeneous equation; then find a particular solution of the given nonhomogeneous
         equation. In Problems 19 and 20, g is an arbitrary continuous function.
         13. t 2 y − 2y = 3t 2 − 1, t > 0;         y1 (t) = t 2 , y2 (t) = t −1
               2               
         14. t y − t(t + 2)y + (t + 2)y = 2t , t > 0;
                                                   3
                                                                      y1 (t) = t, y2 (t) = tet
         15. ty − (1 + t)y + y = t 2 e2t , t > 0;         y1 (t) = 1 + t, y2 (t) = et
                                             2 −t
         16. (1 − t)y + ty − y = 2(t − 1) e , 0 < t < 1;                    y1 (t) = et , y2 (t) = t
                2         
         17. x y − 3xy + 4y = x ln x, x > 0;
                                       2
                                                              y1 (x) = x , y2 (x) = x2 ln x
                                                                          2
18. x2 y + xy + (x2 − 0.25)y = 3x3/2 sin x, x > 0;
    y1 (x) = x−1/2 sin x, y2 (x) = x−1/2 cos x
19. (1 − x)y + xy − y = g(x), 0 < x < 1;               y1 (x) = ex , y2 (x) = x
      2      
20. x y + xy + (x − 0.25)y = g(x), x > 0;
                     2
                                                             y1 (x) = x−1/2 sin x, y2 (x) = x−1/2 cos x
21. Show that the solution of the initial value problem
                    L[y] = y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),             y(t0 ) = y0 ,      y (t0 ) = y0       (i)
    can be written as y = u(t) + v(t), where u and v are solutions of the two initial value
    problems
                               L[u] = 0,             u(t0 ) = y0 ,    u (t0 ) = y0 ,                     (ii)
                                                                        
                               L[v] = g(t),          v(t0 ) = 0,      v (t0 ) = 0,                        (iii)
    respectively. In other words, the nonhomogeneities in the differential equation and in the
    initial conditions can be dealt with separately. Observe that u is easy to find if a fundamental
    set of solutions of L[u] = 0 is known.
22. By choosing the lower limit of integration in Eq. (28) in the text as the initial point t0 , show
    that Y(t) becomes
                                         t
                                            y1 (s)y2 (t) − y1 (t)y2 (s)
                               Y(t) =                          
                                                                            g(s) ds.
                                         t0 y 1 (s)y2 (s) − y1 (s)y2 (s)
    Show that Y(t) is a solution of the initial value problem
                                 L[y] = g(t),          y(t0 ) = 0,    y (t0 ) = 0.
    Thus Y can be identified with v in Problem 21.
23. (a) Use the result of Problem 22 to show that the solution of the initial value problem
                                y + y = g(t),         y(t0 ) = 0,     y (t0 ) = 0                        (i)
    is
                                                t
                                         y=         sin(t − s)g(s) ds.                                     (ii)
                                                 t0
    (b) Use the result of Problem 21 to find the solution of the initial value problem
                               y + y = g(t),         y(0) = y0 ,     y (0) = y0 .
24. Use the result of Problem 22 to find the solution of the initial value problem
                     L[y] = (D − a)(D − b)y = g(t),                 y(t0 ) = 0,      y (t0 ) = 0,
    where a and b are real numbers with a  = b.
25. Use the result of Problem 22 to find the solution of the initial value problem
                 L[y] = [D2 − 2λD + (λ2 + μ2 )]y = g(t),                  y(t0 ) = 0,       y (t0 ) = 0.
    Note that the roots of the characteristic equation are λ ± iμ.
26. Use the result of Problem 22 to find the solution of the initial value problem
                         L[y] = (D − a)2 y = g(t),             y(t0 ) = 0,      y (t0 ) = 0,
    where a is any real number.
               27. By combining the results of Problems 24 through 26, show that the solution of the initial
                    value problem
                                      L[y] = (D2 + bD + c)y = g(t),                y(t0 ) = 0,    y (t0 ) = 0,
                    where b and c are constants, has the form
                                                                        t
                                                        y = φ(t) =          K(t − s)g(s) ds.                         (i)
                                                                         t0
                    The function K depends only on the solutions y1 and y2 of the corresponding homogeneous
                    equation and is independent of the nonhomogeneous term. Once K is determined, all
                    nonhomogeneous problems involving the same differential operator L are reduced to the
                    evaluation of an integral. Note also that although K depends on both t and s, only the com-
                    bination t − s appears, so K is actually a function of a single variable. When we think of g(t)
                    as the input to the problem and of φ(t) as the output, it follows from Eq. (i) that the output
                    depends on the input over the entire interval from the initial point t0 to the current value t.
                    The integral in Eq. (i) is called the convolution of K and g, and K is referred to as the kernel.
               28. The method of reduction of order (Section 3.4) can also be used for the nonhomogeneous
                    equation
                                                          y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),                               (i)
                    provided one solution y1 of the corresponding homogeneous equation is known. Let
                    y = v(t)y1 (t) and show that y satisfies Eq. (i) if v is a solution of
                                                   y1 (t)v + [2y1 (t) + p(t)y1 (t)]v = g(t).                    (ii)
                    Equation (ii) is a first order linear equation for v . By solving this equation, integrating
                    the result, and then multiplying by y1 (t), you can find the general solution of Eq. (i).
               In each of Problems 29 through 32, use the method outlined in Problem 28 to solve the given
               differential equation.
               29. t 2 y − 2ty + 2y = 4t 2 , t > 0;          y1 (t) = t
               30. t 2 y + 7ty + 5y = t, t > 0;           y1 (t) = t −1
               31. ty − (1 + t)y + y = t 2 e2t , t > 0;           y1 (t) = 1 + t       (see Problem 15)
               32. (1 − t)y + ty − y = 2(t − 1)2 e−t , 0 < t < 1;              y1 (t) = et      (see Problem 16)
3.7 Mechanical and Electrical Vibrations
               One of the reasons why second order linear equations with constant coefficients
               are worth studying is that they serve as mathematical models of some important
               physical processes. Two important areas of application are the fields of mechanical
               and electrical oscillations. For example, the motion of a mass on a vibrating spring,
               the torsional oscillations of a shaft with a flywheel, the flow of electric current in
               a simple series circuit, and many other physical problems are all described by the
               solution of an initial value problem of the form
                                     ay + by + cy = g(t),                y(0) = y0 ,     y (0) = y0 .          (1)
                  This illustrates a fundamental relationship between mathematics and physics:
               many physical problems may have the same mathematical model. Thus, once we know
how to solve the initial value problem (1), it is only necessary to make appropriate
interpretations of the constants a, b, and c, and of the functions y and g, to obtain
solutions of different physical problems.
   We will study the motion of a mass on a spring in detail because understanding the
behavior of this simple system is the first step in the investigation of more complex
vibrating systems. Further, the principles involved are common to many problems.
Consider a mass m hanging at rest on the end of a vertical spring of original length
l, as shown in Figure 3.7.1. The mass causes an elongation L of the spring in the
downward (positive) direction. In this static situation there are two forces acting at
the point where the mass is attached to the spring; see Figure 3.7.2. The gravitational
force, or weight of the mass, acts downward and has magnitude mg, where g is the
acceleration due to gravity. There is also a force Fs , due to the spring, that acts upward.
If we assume that the elongation L of the spring is small, the spring force is very nearly
proportional to L; this is known as Hooke’s8 law. Thus we write Fs = −kL, where
the constant of proportionality k is called the spring constant, and the minus sign is
due to the fact that the spring force acts in the upward (negative) direction. Since
the mass is in equilibrium, the two forces balance each other, which means that
                                              mg − kL = 0.                                             (2)
For a given weight w = mg, you can measure L and then use Eq. (2) to determine k.
Note that k has the units of force/length.
                                          l
                                                                        l+L+u
                                            L
                                                   m
                                                                    m
                                                                         u
                               FIGURE 3.7.1 A spring–mass system.
                                                    Fs = –kL
                                                    w = mg
                      FIGURE 3.7.2       Force diagram for a spring–mass system.
8 Robert Hooke (1635–1703) was an English scientist with wide-ranging interests. His most important
book, Micrographia, was published in 1665 and described a variety of microscopical observations. Hooke
first published his law of elastic behavior in 1676 as ceiiinosssttuv; in 1678 he gave the interpretation ut
tensio sic vis, which means, roughly, “as the force so is the displacement.”
  In the corresponding dynamic problem, we are interested in studying the motion
of the mass when it is acted on by an external force or is initially displaced. Let
u(t), measured positive downward, denote the displacement of the mass from its
equilibrium position at time t; see Figure 3.7.1. Then u(t) is related to the forces
acting on the mass through Newton’s law of motion
                                         mu (t) = f (t),                                      (3)
where u is the acceleration of the mass and f is the net force acting on the mass.
Observe that both u and f are functions of time. In this dynamic problem there are
now four separate forces that must be considered.
1. The weight w = mg of the mass always acts downward.
2. The spring force Fs is assumed to be proportional to the total elongation L + u of the
    spring and always acts to restore the spring to its natural position. If L + u > 0, then
    the spring is extended, and the spring force is directed upward. In this case
                                           Fs = −k(L + u).                                       (4)
    On the other hand, if L + u < 0, then the spring is compressed a distance |L + u|, and
    the spring force, which is now directed downward, is given by Fs = k|L + u|. However,
    when L + u < 0, it follows that |L + u| = −(L + u), so Fs is again given by Eq. (4). Thus,
    regardless of the position of the mass, the force exerted by the spring is always expressed
    by Eq. (4).
3. The damping or resistive force Fd always acts in the direction opposite to the direction of
    motion of the mass. This force may arise from several sources: resistance from the air or
    other medium in which the mass moves, internal energy dissipation due to the extension
    or compression of the spring, friction between the mass and the guides (if any) that con-
    strain its motion to one dimension,or a mechanical device (dashpot) that imparts a resistive
    force to the mass. In any case, we assume that the resistive force is proportional to the
    speed |du/dt| of the mass; this is usually referred to as viscous damping. If du/dt > 0,
    then u is increasing, so the mass is moving downward. Then Fd is directed upward and is
    given by
                                           Fd (t) = −γu (t),                                    (5)
    where γ is a positive constant of proportionality known as the damping constant. On
    the other hand, if du/dt < 0, then u is decreasing, the mass is moving upward, and Fd is
    directed downward. In this case, Fd = γ|u (t)|; since |u (t)| = −u (t), it follows that Fd (t)
    is again given by Eq. (5). Thus, regardless of the direction of motion of the mass, the
    damping force is always expressed by Eq. (5).
        The damping force may be rather complicated, and the assumption that it is modeled
    adequately by Eq. (5) may be open to question. Some dashpots do behave as Eq. (5)
    states, and if the other sources of dissipation are small, it may be possible to neglect
    them altogether or to adjust the damping constant γ to approximate them. An important
    benefit of the assumption (5) is that it leads to a linear (rather than a nonlinear) differential
    equation. In turn, this means that a thorough analysis of the system is straightforward, as
    we will show in this section and the next.
4. An applied external force F(t) is directed downward or upward as F(t) is positive or
    negative. This could be a force due to the motion of the mount to which the spring is
    attached, or it could be a force applied directly to the mass. Often the external force
    is periodic.
           Taking account of these forces, we can now rewrite Newton’s law (3) as
                                 mu (t) = mg + Fs (t) + Fd (t) + F(t)
                                          = mg − k[L + u(t)] − γu (t) + F(t).                         (6)
        Since mg − kL = 0 by Eq. (2), it follows that the equation of motion of the mass is
                                        mu (t) + γu (t) + ku(t) = F(t),                             (7)
        where the constants m, γ, and k are positive. Note that Eq. (7) has the same form as
        Eq. (1).
            It is important to understand that Eq. (7) is only an approximate equation for the
        displacement u(t). In particular, both Eqs. (4) and (5) should be viewed as approx-
        imations for the spring force and the damping force, respectively. In our derivation
        we have also neglected the mass of the spring in comparison with the mass of the
        attached body.
           The complete formulation of the vibration problem requires that we specify two
        initial conditions, namely, the initial position u0 and the initial velocity v0 of the mass:
                                           u(0) = u0 ,        u (0) = v0 .                            (8)
        It follows from Theorem 3.2.1 that these conditions give a mathematical problem
        that has a unique solution. This is consistent with our physical intuition that if the
        mass is set in motion with a given initial displacement and velocity, then its posi-
        tion will be determined uniquely at all future times. The position of the mass is
        given (approximately) by the solution of Eq. (7) subject to the prescribed initial
        conditions (8).
        A mass weighing 4 lb stretches a spring 2 in. Suppose that the mass is given an additional
EXAMPLE 6 in displacement in the positive direction and then released. The mass is in a medium that
   1    exerts a viscous resistance of 6 lb when the mass has a velocity of 3 ft/s. Under the assumptions
        discussed in this section, formulate the initial value problem that governs the motion of the
        mass.
           The required initial value problem consists of the differential equation (7) and initial condi-
        tions (8), so our task is to determine the various constants that appear in these equations. The
        first step is to choose the units of measurement. Based on the statement of the problem, it is
        natural to use the English rather than the metric system of units. The only time unit mentioned
        is the second, so we will measure t in seconds. On the other hand, both the foot and the inch
        appear in the statement as units of length. It is immaterial which one we use, but having made
        a choice, we must be consistent. To be definite, let us measure the displacement u in feet.
            Since nothing is said in the statement of the problem about an external force, we assume
        that F(t) = 0. To determine m, note that
                                                 w      4 lb        1 lb·s2
                                           m=      =         2
                                                               =            .
                                                 g   32 ft/s        8 ft
        The damping coefficient γ is determined from the statement that γu is equal to 6 lb when u
        is 3 ft/s. Therefore,
                                                     6 lb         lb·s
                                                γ=          =2         .
                                                    3 ft/s         ft
The spring constant k is found from the statement that the mass stretches the spring by 2 in,
or 1/6 ft. Thus
                                             4 lb         lb
                                      k=           = 24 .
                                            1/6 ft        ft
Consequently, Eq. (7) becomes
                                      1 
                                      8
                                        u + 2u + 24u = 0,
or
                                     u + 16u + 192u = 0.                                  (9)
   The initial conditions are
                                    u(0) = 21 ,     u (0) = 0.                            (10)
The second initial condition is implied by the word “released” in the statement of the problem,
which we interpret to mean that the mass is set in motion with no initial velocity.
Undamped Free Vibrations. If there is no external force, then F(t) = 0 in Eq. (7). Let
us also suppose that there is no damping, so that γ = 0; this is an idealized config-
uration of the system, seldom (if ever) completely attainable in practice. However,
if the actual damping is very small, then the assumption of no damping may yield
satisfactory results over short to moderate time intervals. In this case the equation
of motion (7) reduces to
                                         mu + ku = 0.                                    (11)
The characteristic equation for Eq. (11) is
                                           mr 2 + k = 0
                           
and its roots are r = ±i k/m. Thus the general solution of Eq. (11) is
                                  u = A cos ω0 t + B sin ω0 t,                             (12)
where
                                           ω02 = k/m.                                      (13)
The arbitrary constants A and B can be determined if initial conditions of the form
(8) are given.
   In discussing the solution of Eq. (11), it is convenient to rewrite Eq. (12) in the
form
                                      u = R cos(ω0 t − δ),                                 (14)
or
                             u = R cos δ cos ω0 t + R sin δ sin ω0 t.                      (15)
By comparing Eq. (15) with Eq. (12), we find that A, B, R, and δ are related by the
equations
                                 A = R cos δ,        B = R sin δ.                          (16)
Thus                               
                              R=     A2 + B2 ,         tan δ = B/A.                        (17)
In calculating δ, we must take care to choose the correct quadrant; this can be done
by checking the signs of cos δ and sin δ in Eqs. (16).
           The graph of Eq. (14),or the equivalent Eq. (12),for a typical set of initial conditions
        is shown in Figure 3.7.3. The graph is a displaced cosine wave that describes a periodic,
        or simple harmonic, motion of the mass. The period of the motion is
                                                  2π          m 1/2
                                             T=       = 2π            .                               (18)
                                                  ω0           k
                                          
        The circular frequency ω0 = k/m, measured in radians per unit time, is called the
        natural frequency of the vibration. The maximum displacement R of the mass from
        equilibrium is the amplitude of the motion. The dimensionless parameter δ is called
        the phase, or phase angle, and measures the displacement of the wave from its normal
        position corresponding to δ = 0.
                                    u
                                    R
                             R cos δ
                                          δ             δ +π             δ + 2π     ω 0t
                                   –R
                        FIGURE 3.7.3       Simple harmonic motion; u = R cos(ω0 t − δ).
           Note that the motion described by Eq. (14) has a constant amplitude that does not
        diminish with time. This reflects the fact that, in the absence of damping, there is no
        way for the system to dissipate the energy imparted to it by the initial displacement
        and velocity. Further, for a given mass m and spring constant k, the system always
        vibrates at the same frequency ω0 , regardless of the initial conditions. However, the
        initial conditions do help to determine the amplitude of the motion. Finally, observe
        from Eq. (18) that T increases as m increases, so larger masses vibrate more slowly.
        On the other hand, T decreases as k increases, which means that stiffer springs cause
        the system to vibrate more rapidly.
        Suppose that a mass weighing 10 lb stretches a spring 2 in. If the mass is displaced an additional
EXAMPLE 2 in and is then set in motion with an initial upward velocity of 1 ft/s, determine the position
   2    of the mass at any later time. Also determine the period, amplitude, and phase of the motion.
           The spring constant is k = 10 lb/2 in = 60 lb/ft, and the mass is m = w/g = 10/32 lb·s2 /ft.
        Hence the equation of motion reduces to
                                                 u + 192u = 0,                                      (19)
        and the general solution is
                                                     √              √
                                         u = A cos(8 3t) + B sin(8 3t).
        The solution satisfying the initial conditions u(0) = 1/6 ft and u (0) = −1 ft/s is
                                            1      √         1        √
                                      u=      cos(8 3t) − √ sin(8 3t).                                (20)
                                            6              8 3
                                     √
The natural frequency is ω0 = 192 ∼         = 13.856 rad/s, so the period is T = 2π/ω0 ∼  = 0.45345 s.
The amplitude R and phase δ are found from Eqs. (17). We have
                                    1      1      19
                             R2 =     +       =      , so R ∼   = 0.18162 ft.
                                    36 192       576
                                              √
The second of Eqs. (17) yields tan δ = − 3/4. There are two solutions of this equation, one in
the second quadrant and one in the fourth. In the present problem, cos δ > 0 and sin δ < 0, so
δ is in the fourth quadrant. In fact,
                                                √
                                  δ = −arctan( 3/4) ∼  = −0.40864 rad.
The graph of the solution (20) is shown in Figure 3.7.4.
                     u
                               R~= 0.182                 u = 0.182 cos(8√3 t + 0.409)
                   0.2
                                                                     1.5              t
                 – 0.2                         T~= 0.453
    FIGURE 3.7.4 An undamped free vibration: u + 192u = 0, u(0) = 1/6, u (0) = −1.
Damped Free Vibrations. If we include the effect of damping, the differential equation
governing the motion of the mass is
                                         mu + γu + ku = 0.                                    (21)
We are especially interested in examining the effect of variations in the damping
coefficient γ for given values of the mass m and spring constant k. The corresponding
characteristic equation is
                                           mr 2 + γr + k = 0,
and its roots are
                                                                               
                              −γ ±      γ 2 − 4km       γ                    4km
                   r 1 , r2 =                        =        −1 ±     1− 2 .                    (22)
                                       2m              2m                     γ
Depending on the sign of γ 2 − 4km, the solution u has one of the following forms:
                               γ 2 − 4km > 0,       u = Aer1 t + Ber2 t ;                        (23)
                               γ 2 − 4km = 0,       u = (A + Bt)e−γt/2m ;                        (24)
                                                                          (4km − γ 2 )1/2
   γ 2 − 4km < 0,         u = e−γt/2m (A cos μt + B sin μt),       μ=                     > 0. (25)
                                                                                2m
Since m, γ, and k are positive, γ 2 − 4km is always less than γ 2 . Hence,
if γ 2 − 4km ≥ 0, then the values of r1 and r2 given by Eq. (22) are negative. If
γ 2 − 4km < 0, then the values of r1 and r2 are complex, but with negative real part.
Thus, in all cases, the solution u tends to zero as t → ∞; this occurs regardless of the
values of the arbitrary constants A and B—that is, regardless of the initial conditions.
This confirms our intuitive expectation, namely, that damping gradually dissipates
the energy initially imparted to the system, and consequently the motion dies out
with increasing time.
   The most important case is the third one, which occurs when the damping is small.
If we let A = R cos δ and B = R sin δ in Eq. (25), then we obtain
                                 u = Re−γt/2m cos(μt − δ).                          (26)
The displacement u lies between the curves u = ±Re−γt/2m ; hence it resembles a
cosine wave whose amplitude decreases as t increases. A typical example is sketched
in Figure 3.7.5. The motion is called a damped oscillation or a damped vibration. The
amplitude factor R depends on m, γ, k, and the initial conditions.
                           u
                                            Re– γ t/2m
                      R cos δ
                               δ         δ +π         δ + 2π    δ + 3π    μt
                                            −Re– t/2m
                 FIGURE 3.7.5    Damped vibration; u = Re−γt/2m cos(μt − δ).
   Although the motion is not periodic, the parameter μ determines the frequency
with which the mass oscillates back and forth; consequently, μ is called the quasi
frequency. By comparing μ with the frequency ω0 of undamped motion, we find that
                                                              1/2
                  μ     (4km − γ 2 )1/2 /2m                γ2      ∼      γ2
                     =                      = 1−                  =1−       .      (27)
                 ω0             k/m                       4km            8km
The last approximation is valid when γ 2 /4km is small; we refer to this situation as
“small damping.”Thus the effect of small damping is to reduce slightly the frequency
of the oscillation. By analogy with Eq. (18), the quantity Td = 2π/μ is called the
quasi period. It is the time between successive maxima or successive minima of
the position of the mass, or between successive passages of the mass through its
equilibrium position while going in the same direction. The relation between Td and
T is given by
                                                    −1/2    
                       Td     ω0            γ2             ∼        γ2
                           =     = 1−                      = 1+        ,            (28)
                       T      μ            4km                     8km
where again the last approximation is valid when γ 2 /4km is small.Thus small damping
increases the quasi period.
    Equations (27) and (28) reinforce the significance of the dimensionless ratio
γ 2 /4km. It is not the magnitude of γ alone that determines whether damping is large
or small, but the magnitude of γ 2 compared to 4km. When γ 2 /4km is small, then
damping has a small effect on the quasi frequency and quasi period of the motion.
        On the other hand, if we want to study the detailed motion of the mass for all time,
        then we can never neglect the damping force, no matter how small.
           As γ 2 /4km increases, the quasi frequency μ√decreases and the quasi period Td
        increases. In fact, μ → 0 and Td → ∞ as γ → 2 km. As indicated by Eqs. (23),√(24),
        and (25), the nature of √      the solution changes as γ passes through the value 2 km.
        The motion with γ = 2 km is said to be critically damped. For larger values of γ
        the motion is said to be overdamped. In these cases, given by Eqs. (24) and (23),
        respectively, the mass may pass through its equilibrium position at most once (see
        Figure 3.7.6) and then creeps back to it. The mass does not oscillate about equilibrium,
        as it does for small γ. Two typical examples of critically damped motion are shown
        in Figure 3.7.6, and the situation is discussed further in Problems 21 and 22.
                              u
                               2
                                                            u(0) = 12 , u'(0) = 74
                               1
                                                            u=
                                                                ( + 2t) e
                                                                  1
                                                                  2
                                                                           – t/2
                                          2           4         6          8          10            t
                                                                           u(0) = 12 , u'         7
                                                                                                  4
                             –1
                                                                            u=
                                                                                  ( – t)e
                                                                                   1
                                                                                   2
                                                                                       3
                                                                                       2
                                                                                            – t/2
             FIGURE 3.7.6        Critically damped motions: u + u + 0.25u = 0; u = (A + Bt)e−t/2 .
        The motion of a certain spring–mass system is governed by the differential equation
EXAMPLE
                                                  u + 0.125u + u = 0,                              (29)
   3
        where u is measured in feet and t in seconds. If u(0) = 2 and u (0) = 0, determine the position
        of the mass at any time. Find the quasi frequency and the quasi period, as well as the time
        at which the mass first passes through its equilibrium position. Also find the time τ such that
        |u(t)| < 0.1 for all t > τ.
           The solution of Eq. (29) is
                                                           √                  √       
                                            −t/16            255                 255
                                      u=e           A cos         t + B sin          t .
                                                             16                  16
                                                                                       √
        To satisfy the initial conditions, we must choose A = 2 and B = 2/ 255; hence the solution of
        the initial value problem is
                                                        √                        √       
                                          −t/16            255         2            255
                                    u=e           2 cos        t+ √        sin          t
                                                          16           255         16
                                                            √            
                                           32 −t/16             255
                                      = √       e       cos          t−δ ,                            (30)
                                           255                 16
         u
                              u" + u
                                                      u(0) = 2, u' (0) = 0
                              u" + 0.125 u' + u = 0
          2
          1
                          10              20              30               40              50     t
        –1
        –2
                  FIGURE 3.7.7 Vibration with small damping (solid curve)
                               and with no damping (dashed curve).
                  √
where tan δ = 1/ 255, so δ =   ∼ 0.06254. The displacement of the mass as a function of time is
shown in Figure 3.7.7. For purposes of comparison, we also show the motion if the damping
term is neglected.               √
   The quasi frequency is μ = 255/16 ∼      = 0.998, and the quasi period is Td = 2π/μ ∼      = 6.295 s.
These values differ only slightly from the corresponding values (1 and 2π, respectively) for
the undamped oscillation. This is evident also from the graphs in Figure 3.7.7, which rise
and fall almost together. The damping coefficient is small in this example: only one-sixteenth
of the critical value, in fact. Nevertheless, the amplitude of the oscillation is reduced rather
rapidly. Figure 3.7.8 shows the graph of the solution for 40 ≤ t ≤ 60, together with the graphs
of u = ±0.1. From the graph it appears that τ is about 47.5, and by a more precise calculation
we find that τ ∼ = 47.5149 s.
                u
                                                  u = 0.1
              0.1
                                                       u=
                                                            32
                                                           √255           (
                                                                e–t/16 cos √255
                                                                            16
                                                                                t – 0.06254 )
             0.05
                                         τ
                  40             45              50             55                  60     t
            –0.05
                                                  u = – 0.1
             –0.1
            –0.15
FIGURE 3.7.8       Solution of Example 3; determination of the time τ after which |u(t)| < 0.1.
   To find the time √ at which the mass first passes through its equilibrium position, we refer to
Eq. (30) and set 255t/16 − δ equal to π/2, the smallest positive zero of the cosine function.
Then, by solving for t, we obtain
                                           16      π
                                     t= √            +δ ∼  = 1.637 s.
                                            255 2
Electric Circuits. A second example of the occurrence of second order linear differen-
tial equations with constant coefficients is their use as a model of the flow of electric
current in the simple series circuit shown in Figure 3.7.9. The current I, measured
in amperes (A), is a function of time t. The resistance R in ohms (), the capaci-
tance C in farads (F), and the inductance L in henrys (H) are all positive and are
assumed to be known constants. The impressed voltage E in volts (V) is a given func-
tion of time. Another physical quantity that enters the discussion is the total charge
Q in coulombs (C) on the capacitor at time t. The relation between charge Q and
current I is
                                              I = dQ/dt.                                               (31)
                             Resistance R    Capacitance C
                                I                                Inductance L
                            Impressed voltage E(t)
                              FIGURE 3.7.9 A simple electric circuit.
   The flow of current in the circuit is governed by Kirchhoff’s9 second law: In a closed
circuit the impressed voltage is equal to the sum of the voltage drops in the rest of the
circuit.
   According to the elementary laws of electricity, we know that
      The voltage drop across the resistor is IR.
      The voltage drop across the capacitor is Q/C.
      The voltage drop across the inductor is LdI/dt.
Hence, by Kirchhoff’s law,
                                        dI             1
                                     L      + RI + Q = E(t).                                           (32)
                                        dt            C
9 Gustav Kirchhoff (1824–1887) was a German physicist and professor at Breslau, Heidelberg, and Berlin.
He formulated the basic laws of electric circuits about 1845 while still a student at Albertus University in
his native Königsberg. In 1857 he discovered that an electric current in a resistanceless wire travels at the
speed of light. He is also famous for fundamental work in electromagnetic absorption and emission and
was one of the founders of spectroscopy.
         The units for voltage, resistance, current, charge, capacitance, inductance, and time
         are all related:
            1 volt = 1 ohm · 1 ampere = 1 coulomb/1 farad = 1 henry · 1 ampere/1 second.
            Substituting for I from Eq. (31), we obtain the differential equation
                                                               1
                                             LQ + RQ + Q = E(t)                                       (33)
                                                               C
         for the charge Q. The initial conditions are
                                       Q(t0 ) = Q0 ,       Q (t0 ) = I(t0 ) = I0 .                      (34)
         Thus we must know the charge on the capacitor and the current in the circuit at some
         initial time t0 .
            Alternatively, we can obtain a differential equation for the current I by differen-
         tiating Eq. (33) with respect to t, and then substituting for dQ/dt from Eq. (31). The
         result is
                                                              1
                                              LI  + RI  + I = E (t),                                 (35)
                                                             C
         with the initial conditions
                                             I(t0 ) = I0 ,     I  (t0 ) = I0 .                         (36)
         From Eq. (32) it follows that
                                                  E(t0 ) − RI0 − (1/C)Q0
                                          I0 =                                  .                       (37)
                                                              L
         Hence I0 is also determined by the initial charge and current, which are physically
         measurable quantities.
            The most important conclusion from this discussion is that the flow of current in the
         circuit is described by an initial value problem of precisely the same form as the one
         that describes the motion of a spring–mass system. This is a good example of the uni-
         fying role of mathematics: once you know how to solve second order linear equations
         with constant coefficients, you can interpret the results in terms of mechanical vibra-
         tions, electric circuits, or any other physical situation that leads to the same problem.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4, determine ω0 , R, and δ so as to write the given expression in
         the form u = R cos(ω0 t − δ).
                                                                                   √
           1. u = 3 cos 2t + 4 sin 2t                         2. u = − cos t + 3 sin t
           3. u = 4 cos 3t − 2 sin 3t                         4. u = −2 cos πt − 3 sin πt
           5. A mass weighing 2 lb stretches a spring 6 in. If the mass is pulled down an additional 3 in
              and then released, and if there is no damping, determine the position u of the mass at any
              time t. Plot u versus t. Find the frequency, period, and amplitude of the motion.
           6. A mass of 100 g stretches a spring 5 cm. If the mass is set in motion from its equilibrium posi-
              tion with a downward velocity of 10 cm/s, and if there is no damping, determine the position
              u of the mass at any time t. When does the mass first return to its equilibrium position?
           7. A mass weighing 3 lb stretches a spring 3 in. If the mass is pushed upward, contracting
              the spring a distance of 1 in, and then set in motion with a downward velocity of 2 ft/s,
              and if there is no damping, find the position u of the mass at any time t. Determine the
              frequency, period, amplitude, and phase of the motion.
 8. A series circuit has a capacitor of 0.25 × 10−6 F and an inductor of 1 H. If the initial charge
    on the capacitor is 10−6 C and there is no initial current, find the charge Q on the capacitor
    at any time t.
 9. A mass of 20 g stretches a spring 5 cm. Suppose that the mass is also attached to a viscous
    damper with a damping constant of 400 dyn·s/cm. If the mass is pulled down an additional
    2 cm and then released, find its position u at any time t. Plot u versus t. Determine the quasi
    frequency and the quasi period. Determine the ratio of the quasi period to the period of
    the corresponding undamped motion. Also find the time τ such that |u(t)| < 0.05 cm for
    all t > τ.
10. A mass weighing 16 lb stretches a spring 3 in. The mass is attached to a viscous damper
    with a damping constant of 2 lb·s/ft. If the mass is set in motion from its equilibrium posi-
    tion with a downward velocity of 3 in/s, find its position u at any time t. Plot u versus t.
    Determine when the mass first returns to its equilibrium position. Also find the time τ
    such that |u(t)| < 0.01 in for all t > τ.
11. A spring is stretched 10 cm by a force of 3 N. A mass of 2 kg is hung from the spring and
    is also attached to a viscous damper that exerts a force of 3 N when the velocity of the
    mass is 5 m/s. If the mass is pulled down 5 cm below its equilibrium position and given an
    initial downward velocity of 10 cm/s, determine its position u at any time t. Find the quasi
    frequency μ and the ratio of μ to the natural frequency of the corresponding undamped
    motion.
12. A series circuit has a capacitor of 10−5 F, a resistor of 3 × 102 , and an inductor of 0.2 H.
    The initial charge on the capacitor is 10−6 C and there is no initial current. Find the charge
    Q on the capacitor at any time t.
13. A certain vibrating system satisfies the equation u + γu + u = 0. Find the value of the
    damping coefficient γ for which the quasi period of the damped motion is 50% greater
    than the period of the corresponding undamped motion.
14. Show that the period    of motion of an undamped vibration of a mass hanging from a ver-
    tical spring is 2π L/g, where L is the elongation of the spring due to the mass, and g is
    the acceleration due to gravity.
15. Show that the solution of the initial value problem
                              mu + γu + ku = 0,       u(t0 ) = u0 , u (t0 ) = u0
    can be expressed as the sum u = v + w, where v satisfies the initial conditions
    v(t0 ) = u0 , v (t0 ) = 0, w satisfies the initial conditions w(t0 ) = 0, w (t0 ) = u0 , and both v
    and w satisfy the same differential equation as u. This is another instance of superposing
    solutions of simpler problems to obtain the solution of a more general problem.
16. Show that A cos ω0 t + B sin ω0 t can be written in the form r sin(ω0 t − θ). Determine r and
    θ in terms of A and B. If R cos(ω0 t − δ) = r sin(ω0 t − θ), determine the relationship among
    R, r, δ, and θ.
17. A mass weighing 8 lb stretches a spring 1.5 in. The mass is also attached to a damper with
    coefficient γ. Determine the value of γ for which the system is critically damped; be sure
    to give the units for γ.
18. If a series circuit has a capacitor of C = 0.8 × 10−6 F and an inductor of L = 0.2 H, find
    the resistance R so that the circuit is critically damped.
19. Assume that the system described by the equation mu + γu + ku = 0 is either critically
    damped or overdamped. Show that the mass can pass through the equilibrium position at
    most once, regardless of the initial conditions.
    Hint: Determine all possible values of t for which u = 0.
20. Assume that the system described by the equation mu + γu + ku = 0 is critically damped
    and that the initial conditions are u(0) = u0 , u (0) = v0 . If v0 = 0,show that u → 0 as t → ∞
    but that u is never zero. If u0 is positive, determine a condition on v0 that will ensure that
    the mass passes through its equilibrium position after it is released.
21. Logarithmic Decrement. (a) For the damped oscillation described by Eq. (26), show
    that the time between successive maxima is Td = 2π/μ.
    (b) Show that the ratio of the displacements at two successive maxima is given by
    exp(γTd /2m). Observe that this ratio does not depend on which pair of maxima
    is chosen. The natural logarithm of this ratio is called the logarithmic decrement and is
    denoted by .
    (c) Show that  = πγ/mμ. Since m,μ,and  are quantities that can be measured easily for
    a mechanical system, this result provides a convenient and practical method for determin-
    ing the damping constant of the system, which is more difficult to measure directly. In par-
    ticular, for the motion of a vibrating mass in a viscous fluid, the damping constant depends
    on the viscosity of the fluid; for simple geometric shapes the form of this dependence is
    known, and the preceding relation allows the experimental determination of the viscosity.
    This is one of the most accurate ways of determining the viscosity of a gas at high pressure.
22. Referring to Problem 21, find the logarithmic decrement of the system in Problem 10.
23. For the system in Problem 17, suppose that  = 3 and Td = 0.3 s. Referring to Problem
    21, determine the value of the damping coefficient γ.
24. The position of a certain spring–mass system satisfies the initial value problem
                                3 
                                2
                                  u + ku = 0,       u(0) = 2,      u (0) = v.
    If the period and amplitude of the resulting motion are observed to be π and 3, respectively,
    determine the values of k and v.
25. Consider the initial value problem
                             u + γu + u = 0,        u(0) = 2,      u (0) = 0.
    We wish to explore how long a time interval is required for the solution to become “neg-
    ligible” and how this interval depends on the damping coefficient γ. To be more precise,
    let us seek the time τ such that |u(t)| < 0.01 for all t > τ. Note that critical damping for
    this problem occurs for γ = 2.
    (a) Let γ = 0.25 and determine τ, or at least estimate it fairly accurately from a plot of
    the solution.
    (b) Repeat part (a) for several other values of γ in the interval 0 < γ < 1.5. Note that τ
    steadily decreases as γ increases for γ in this range.
    (c) Create a graph of τ versus γ by plotting the pairs of values found in parts (a) and (b).
    Is the graph a smooth curve?
    (d) Repeat part (b) for values of γ between 1.5 and 2. Show that τ continues to decrease
    until γ reaches a certain critical value γ0 , after which τ increases. Find γ0 and the
    corresponding minimum value of τ to two decimal places.
    (e) Another way to proceed is to write the solution of the initial value problem in
    the form (26). Neglect the cosine factor and consider only the exponential factor and the
    amplitude R. Then find an expression for τ as a function of γ. Compare the approximate
    results obtained in this way with the values determined in parts (a), (b), and (d).
26. Consider the initial value problem
                           mu + γu + ku = 0,         u(0) = u0 ,     u (0) = v0 .
    Assume that γ 2 < 4km.
     (a) Solve the initial value problem.
     (b) Write the solution in the form u(t) = R exp(−γt/2m) cos(μt − δ). Determine R in
     terms of m, γ, k, u0 , and v0 .
     (c) Investigate the dependence of R on the damping coefficient γ for fixed values of the
     other parameters.
27. A cubic block of side l and mass density ρ per unit volume is floating in a fluid of mass den-
     sity ρ0 per unit volume, where ρ0 > ρ. If the block is slightly depressed and then released,
     it oscillates in the vertical direction. Assuming that the viscous damping of the fluid and
     air can be neglected, derive the differential equation of motion and determine the period
     of the motion.
     Hint: Use Archimedes’10 principle: an object that is completely or partially submerged
     in a fluid is acted on by an upward (buoyant) force equal to the weight of the displaced
     fluid.
28. The position of a certain undamped spring–mass system satisfies the initial value problem
                                   u + 2u = 0,       u(0) = 0,   u (0) = 2.
     (a) Find the solution of this initial value problem.
     (b) Plot u versus t and u versus t on the same axes.
     (c) Plot u versus u; that is, plot u(t) and u (t) parametrically with t as the parameter.
     This plot is known as a phase plot, and the uu -plane is called the phase plane. Observe
     that a closed curve in the phase plane corresponds to a periodic solution u(t). What is the
     direction of motion on the phase plot as t increases?
29. The position of a certain spring–mass system satisfies the initial value problem
                               u + 41 u + 2u = 0,      u(0) = 0,    u (0) = 2.
     (a) Find the solution of this initial value problem.
     (b) Plot u versus t and u versus t on the same axes.
     (c) Plot u versus u in the phase plane (see Problem 28). Identify several corresponding
     points on the curves in parts (b) and (c). What is the direction of motion on the phase plot
     as t increases?
30. In the absence of damping, the motion of a spring–mass system satisfies the initial value
     problem
                                  mu + ku = 0,        u(0) = a,   u (0) = b.
     (a) Show that the kinetic energy initially imparted to the mass is mb2 /2 and that the
     potential energy initially stored in the spring is ka2 /2, so that initially the total energy in
     the system is (ka2 + mb2 )/2.
     (b) Solve the given initial value problem.
     (c) Using the solution in part (b), determine the total energy in the system at any time t.
     Your result should confirm the principle of conservation of energy for this system.
10Archimedes (287–212 BC) was the foremost of the ancient Greek mathematicians. He lived in Syracuse
on the island of Sicily. His most notable discoveries were in geometry, but he also made important contri-
butions to hydrostatics and other branches of mechanics. His method of exhaustion is a precursor of the
integral calculus developed by Newton and Leibniz almost two millennia later. He died at the hands of a
Roman soldier during the Second Punic War.
               31. Suppose that a mass m slides without friction on a horizontal surface. The mass is attached
                   to a spring with spring constant k, as shown in Figure 3.7.10, and is also subject to viscous
                   air resistance with coefficient γ. Show that the displacement u(t) of the mass from its
                   equilibrium position satisfies Eq. (21). How does the derivation of the equation of motion
                   in this case differ from the derivation given in the text?
                                                                        u(t)
                                                          k
                                                                    m
                                           FIGURE 3.7.10 A spring–mass system.
               32. In the spring–mass system of Problem 31, suppose that the spring force is not given by
                   Hooke’s law but instead satisfies the relation
                                                         Fs = −(ku + u3 ),
                   where k > 0 and  is small but may be of either sign. The spring is called a hardening spring
                   if  > 0 and a softening spring if  < 0. Why are these terms appropriate?
                   (a) Show that the displacement u(t) of the mass from its equilibrium position satisfies the
                   differential equation
                                                    mu + γu + ku + u3 = 0.
                   Suppose that the initial conditions are
                                                      u(0) = 0,     u (0) = 1.
                   In the remainder of this problem, assume that m = 1, k = 1, and γ = 0.
                   (b) Find u(t) when  = 0 and also determine the amplitude and period of the motion.
                   (c) Let  = 0.1. Plot a numerical approximation to the solution. Does the motion appear
                   to be periodic? Estimate the amplitude and period.
                   (d) Repeat part (c) for  = 0.2 and  = 0.3.
                   (e) Plot your estimated values of the amplitude A and the period T versus . Describe
                   the way in which A and T, respectively, depend on .
                   (f) Repeat parts (c), (d), and (e) for negative values of .
3.8 Forced Vibrations
               We will now investigate the situation in which a periodic external force is applied
               to a spring–mass system. The behavior of this simple system models that of many
               oscillatory systems with an external force due, for example, to a motor attached to
               the system. We will first consider the case in which damping is present and will look
               later at the idealized special case in which there is assumed to be no damping.
               Forced Vibrations with Damping. The algebraic calculations can be fairly complicated in
               this kind of problem, so we will begin with a relatively simple example.
        Suppose that the motion of a certain spring–mass system satisfies the differential equation
EXAMPLE
                                                 u + u + 1.25u = 3 cos t                               (1)
   1
        and the initial conditions
                                                  u(0) = 2,        u (0) = 3.                            (2)
        Find the solution of this initial value problem and describe the behavior of the solution for
        large t.
            The homogeneous equation corresponding to Eq. (1) has the characteristic equation
        r 2 + r + 1.25 = 0 with roots r = −0.5 ± i. Thus the general solution uc (t) of this homogeneous
        equation is
                                          uc (t) = c1 e−t/2 cos t + c2 e−t/2 sin t.                       (3)
            A particular solution of Eq. (1) has the form U(t) = A cos t + B sin t, where A and B
        are found by substituting U(t) for u in Eq. (1). We have U  (t) = −A sin t + B cos t and
        U  (t) = −A cos t − B sin t. Thus, from Eq. (1) we obtain
                                  (0.25A + B) cos t + (−A + 0.25B) sin t = 3 cos t.
        Consequently, A and B must satisfy the equations
                                        0.25A + B = 3,            −A + 0.25B = 0,
        with the result that A = 12/17 and B = 48/17. Therefore, the particular solution is
                                                 U(t) = 1217
                                                             cos t + 4817
                                                                          sin t,                          (4)
        and the general solution of Eq. (1) is
                         u = uc (t) + U(t) = c1 e−t/2 cos t + c2 e−t/2 sin t + 12  17
                                                                                      cos t + 4817
                                                                                                   sin t. (5)
            The remaining constants c1 and c2 are determined by the initial conditions (2). From Eq. (5)
        we have
                               u(0) = c1 + 12  17
                                                   = 2,      u (0) = − 21 c1 + c2 + 48 17
                                                                                           = 3,
        so c1 = 22/17 and c2 = 14/17. Thus we finally obtain the solution of the given initial value
        problem, namely,
                                 u = 22
                                      17
                                         e−t/2 cos t + 14
                                                        17
                                                           e−t/2 sin t + 12
                                                                          17
                                                                             cos t + 48
                                                                                      17
                                                                                         sin t.           (6)
        The graph of the solution (6) is shown by the black curve in Figure 3.8.1.
            It is important to note that the solution consists of two distinct parts. The first two terms on
        the right side of Eq. (6) contain the exponential factor e−t/2 ; as a result they rapidly approach
        zero. It is customary to call these terms transient. The remaining terms in Eq. (6) involve only
        sines and cosines, so they represent an oscillation that continues indefinitely. We refer to them
        as a steady state. The solid and dashed blue curves in Figure 3.8.1 show the transient and the
        steady state parts of the solution, respectively. The transient part comes from the solution
        of the homogeneous equation corresponding to Eq. (1) and is needed to satisfy the initial
        conditions. The steady state is the particular solution of the full nonhomogeneous equation.
        After a fairly short time, the transient is vanishingly small and the full solution is essentially
        indistinguishable from the steady state.
            u          Full solution
            3
                       Steady state
            2
                           Transient
            1
                              4                 8              12             16 t
           –1
           –2
           –3
                FIGURE 3.8.1 Solution of the initial value problem (1), (2):
                        u + u + 1.25u = 3 cos t, u(0) = 2, u (0) = 3.
   The equation of motion of a general spring–mass system subject to an external
force F(t) is [Eq. (7) in Section 3.7]
                               mu (t) + γu (t) + ku(t) = F(t),                      (7)
where m, γ, and k are the mass, damping coefficient, and spring constant of the spring–
mass system. Suppose now that the external force is given by F0 cos ωt, where F0 and
ω are positive constants representing the amplitude and frequency, respectively, of
the force. Then Eq. (7) becomes
                                 mu + γu + ku = F0 cos ωt.                          (8)
   Solutions of Eq. (8) behave very much like the solution in the preceding example.
The general solution of Eq. (8) must have the form
               u = c1 u1 (t) + c2 u2 (t) + A cos ωt + B sin ωt = uc (t) + U(t).        (9)
The first two terms on the right side of Eq. (9) are the general solution uc (t) of
the homogeneous equation corresponding to Eq. (8), and the latter two terms are
a particular solution U(t) of the full nonhomogeneous equation. The coefficients
A and B can be found, as usual, by substituting these terms into the differen-
tial equation (8), while the arbitrary constants c1 and c2 are available to satisfy
initial conditions, if any are prescribed. The solutions u1 (t) and u2 (t) of the homo-
geneous equation depend on the roots r1 and r2 of the characteristic equation
mr 2 + γr + k = 0. Since m, γ, and k are all positive, it follows that r1 and r2 either
are real and negative or are complex conjugates with negative real part. In either
case, both u1 (t) and u2 (t) approach zero as t → ∞. Since uc (t) dies out as t increases,
it is called the transient solution. In many applications, it is of little importance and
(depending on the value of γ) may well be undetectable after only a few seconds.
   The remaining terms in Eq. (9)—namely, U(t) = A cos ωt + B sin ωt—do not die
out as t increases but persist indefinitely, or as long as the external force is applied.
They represent a steady oscillation with the same frequency as the external force
and are called the steady state solution or the forced response. The transient solution
enables us to satisfy whatever initial conditions may be imposed. With increasing
time, the energy put into the system by the initial displacement and velocity is dis-
sipated through the damping force, and the motion then becomes the response of
the system to the external force. Without damping, the effect of the initial conditions
would persist for all time.
   It is convenient to express U(t) as a single trigonometric term rather than as a sum
of two terms. Recall that we did this for other similar expressions in Section 3.7. Thus
we write
                                   U(t) = R cos(ωt − δ).                             (10)
The amplitude R and phase δ depend directly on A and B and indirectly on the
parameters in the differential equation (8). It is possible to show, by straightforward
but somewhat lengthy algebraic computations, that
                        F0                m(ω02 − ω2 )                  γω
                  R=       ,     cos δ =                  ,    sin δ =      ,        (11)
                                                                      
where
                   =      m2 (ω02 − ω2 )2 + γ 2 ω2     and    ω02 = k/m.            (12)
Recall that ω0 is the natural frequency of the unforced system in the absence of
damping.
  We now investigate how the amplitude R of the steady state oscillation depends on
the frequency ω of the external force. Substituting from Eq. (12) into the expression
for R in Eq. (11) and executing some algebraic manipulations, we find that
                                   !                 2
                                                               1/2
                          Rk                   ω2           ω2
                                =1        1− 2          + 2        ,                (13)
                           F0                  ω0           ω0
where  = γ 2 /mk. Observe that the quantity Rk/F0 is the ratio of the amplitude R
of the forced response to F0 /k, the static displacement of the spring produced by a
force F0 .
   For low frequency excitation—that is, as ω → 0—it follows from Eq. (13) that
Rk/F0 → 1 or R → F0 /k. At the other extreme, for very high frequency excitation,
Eq. (13) implies that R → 0 as ω → ∞. At an intermediate value of ω the amplitude
may have a maximum.To find this maximum point,we can differentiate R with respect
to ω and set the result equal to zero. In this way we find that the maximum amplitude
occurs when ω = ωmax , where
                                                      
                                          γ2                 γ2
                         ωmax
                            2
                                = ω02 −      2
                                               =  ω 0 1−
                                                    2
                                                                    .                (14)
                                         2m                 2mk
   Note that ωmax < ω0 and that ωmax is close to ω0 when γ is small. The maximum
value of R is                                               
                                      F0            ∼    F0          γ2
                   Rmax =                          =         1+          ,          (15)
                              γω0 1 − (γ 2 /4mk)        γω0        8mk
where the last expression is an approximation for small γ. If γ 2 /mk > 2, then ωmax as
given by Eq. (14) is imaginary; in this case the maximum value of R occurs for ω = 0,
and R is a monotone decreasing function of ω. Recall that critical damping occurs
when γ 2 /mk = 4.
   For small γ it follows from Eq. (15) that Rmax ∼    = F0 /γω0 . Thus, for lightly damped
systems, the amplitude R of the forced response when ω is near ω0 is quite large
even for relatively small external forces, and the smaller the value of γ, the more
pronounced is this effect. This phenomenon is known as resonance, and it is often
an important design consideration. Resonance can be either good or bad, depending
on the circumstances. It must be taken very seriously in the design of structures,
such as buildings and bridges, where it can produce instabilities that might lead to
the catastrophic failure of the structure. On the other hand, resonance can be put
to good use in the design of instruments, such as seismographs, that are intended to
detect weak periodic incoming signals.
   Figure 3.8.2 contains some representative graphs of Rk/F0 versus ω/ω0 for several
values of  = γ 2 /mk. The graph corresponding to  = 0.015625 is included because
this is the value of  that occurs in Example 2 below. Note particularly the sharp
peak in the curve corresponding to  = 0.015625 near ω/ω0 = 1. The limiting case
as  → 0 is also shown. It follows from Eq. (13), or from Eqs. (11) and (12), that
R → F0 /m|ω02 − ω2 | as γ → 0 and hence Rk/F0 is asymptotic to the vertical line
ω = ω0 , as shown in the figure. As the damping in the system increases, the peak
response gradually diminishes.
            Rk/F0
               10
                                     Γ→0
                 8
                             Γ = 0.015625
                 6
                 4
                                  Γ = 0.1
                              Γ = 0.5                   Γ=2
                 2
                        0.2  0.4   0.6   0.8  1    1.2   1.4  1.6   1.8     2 ω /ω 0
            FIGURE 3.8.2 Forced vibration with damping: amplitude of steady
                state response versus frequency of driving force;  = γ 2 /mk.
   Figure 3.8.2 also illustrates the usefulness of dimensionless variables. You can easily
verify that each of the quantities Rk/F0 , ω/ω0 , and  is dimensionless. The importance
of this observation is that the number of significant parameters in the problem has
been reduced to three rather than the five that appear in Eq. (8). Thus only one
family of curves, of which a few are shown in Figure 3.8.2, is needed to describe the
response-versus-frequency behavior of all systems governed by Eq. (8).
  The phase angle δ also depends in an interesting way on ω. For ω near zero,it follows
from Eqs. (11) and (12) that cos δ ∼   = 1 and sin δ ∼
                                                     = 0. Thus δ ∼ = 0, and the response is
nearly in phase with the excitation, meaning that they rise and fall together and,
in particular, assume their respective maxima nearly together and their respective
        minima nearly together. For ω = ω0 we find that cos δ = 0 and sin δ = 1, so δ = π/2.
        In this case the response lags behind the excitation by π/2; that is, the peaks of
        the response occur π/2 later than the peaks of the excitation, and similarly for the
        valleys. Finally, for ω very large, we have cos δ ∼   = −1 and sin δ ∼    = 0. Thus δ ∼ = π, so that
        the response is nearly out of phase with the excitation; this means that the response
        is minimum when the excitation is maximum, and vice versa. Figure 3.8.3 shows
        the graphs of δ versus ω/ω0 for several values of . For small damping, the phase
        transition from near δ = 0 to near δ = π occurs rather abruptly, whereas for larger
        values of the damping parameter, the transition takes place more gradually.
                        δ
                                                      δ =π
                            Γ = 0.015625
                                  Γ = 0.1
                                                            Γ=2
                                                Γ = 0.5
                                                                                         ω /ω 0
                        FIGURE 3.8.3 Forced vibration with damping: phase of steady
                          state response versus frequency of driving force;  = γ 2 /mk.
        Consider the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                              u + 0.125u + u = 3 cos ωt,     u(0) = 2,    u (0) = 0.                (16)
   2
        Show plots of the solution for different values of the forcing frequency ω, and compare them
        with corresponding plots of the forcing function.
           For this system we have ω0 = 1 and  = 1/64 = 0.015625. Its unforced motion was discussed
        in Example 3 of Section 3.7, and Figure 3.7.7 shows the graph of the solution of the unforced
        problem. Figures 3.8.4, 3.8.5, and 3.8.6 show the solution of the forced problem (16) for ω = 0.3,
        ω = 1, and ω = 2, respectively. The graph of the corresponding forcing function is also shown
        in each figure. In this example the static displacement, F0 /k, is equal to 3.
           Figure 3.8.4 shows the low frequency case, ω/ω0 = 0.3. After the initial transient response is
        substantially damped out, the remaining steady state response is essentially in phase with the
        excitation, and the amplitude of the response is somewhat larger than the static displacement.
        To be specific, R ∼ = 3.2939 and δ ∼ = 0.041185.
           The resonant case, ω/ω0 = 1, is shown in Figure 3.8.5. Here the amplitude of the steady state
        response is eight times the static displacement, and the figure also shows the predicted phase
        lag of π/2 relative to the external force.
           The case of comparatively high frequency excitation is shown in Figure 3.8.6. Observe that
        the amplitude of the steady forced response is approximately one-third the static displacement
        and that the phase difference between the excitation and the response is approximately π. More
        precisely, we find that R ∼  = 0.99655 and that δ ∼
                                                         = 3.0585.
       u
       3
       2
       1
               10      20      30      40     50      60      70      80 t
      –1
      –2
      –3
                 Solution                  Forcing function
     FIGURE 3.8.4 A forced vibration with damping; solution of
Eq. (16) with ω = 0.3: u + 0.125u + u = 3 cos 0.3t, u(0) = 2, u (0) = 0.
       u
      20
      10
                  10        20        30         40        50        60 t
     –10
     –20
      Forcing function            Solution
     FIGURE 3.8.5 A forced vibration with damping; solution of
  Eq. (16) with ω = 1: u + 0.125u + u = 3 cos t, u(0) = 2, u (0) = 0.
       u
        3
        2
        1
                    10          20          30           40         50 t
      –1
      –2
      –3
             Forcing function           Solution
     FIGURE 3.8.6 A forced vibration with damping; solution of
 Eq. (16) with ω = 2: u + 0.125u + u = 3 cos 2t, u(0) = 2, u (0) = 0.
        Forced Vibrations Without Damping. We now assume that γ = 0 in Eq. (8), thereby
        obtaining the equation of motion of an undamped forced oscillator,
                                            mu + ku = F0 cos ωt.                           (17)
        The form of the general solution of Eq. (17) is different, depending on whether     the
        forcing frequency ω is different from or equal to the natural frequency ω0 = k/m
        of the unforced system. First consider the case ω  = ω0 ; then the general solution of
        Eq. (17) is
                                                                       F0
                              u = c1 cos ω0 t + c2 sin ω0 t +                    cos ωt.     (18)
                                                                  m(ω02 − ω2 )
        The constants c1 and c2 are determined by the initial conditions. The resulting motion
        is, in general, the sum of two periodic motions of different frequencies (ω0 and ω)
        and different amplitudes as well.
            It is particularly interesting to suppose that the mass is initially at rest, so that
        the initial conditions are u(0) = 0 and u (0) = 0. Then the energy driving the sys-
        tem comes entirely from the external force, with no contribution from the initial
        conditions. In this case it turns out that the constants c1 and c2 in Eq. (18) are
        given by
                                                     F0
                                       c1 = −                   ,     c2 = 0,                (19)
                                               m(ω02 − ω2 )
        and the solution of Eq. (17) is
                                                F0
                                      u=                  (cos ωt − cos ω0 t).               (20)
                                           m(ω0 − ω2 )
                                               2
        This is the sum of two periodic functions of different periods but the same
        amplitude. Making use of the trigonometric identities for cos(A ± B) with
        A = (ω0 + ω)t/2 and B = (ω0 − ω)t/2, we can write Eq. (20) in the form
                                                                    
                                          2F0           (ω0 − ω)t           (ω0 + ω)t
                              u=                   sin                 sin             .     (21)
                                      m(ω0 − ω )
                                          2     2             2                  2
        If |ω0 − ω| is small, then ω0 + ω is much greater than |ω0 − ω|. Consequently,
        sin(ω0 + ω)t/2 is a rapidly oscillating function compared to sin(ω0 − ω)t/2. Thus the
        motion is a rapid oscillation with frequency (ω0 + ω)/2 but with a slowly varying
        sinusoidal amplitude
                                              2F0       
                                                              (ω0 − ω)t 
                                                         sin             .
                                          m|ω02 − ω2 |             2
        This type of motion, possessing a periodic variation of amplitude, exhibits what is
        called a beat. For example, such a phenomenon occurs in acoustics when two tuning
        forks of nearly equal frequency are excited simultaneously. In this case the peri-
        odic variation of amplitude is quite apparent to the unaided ear. In electronics, the
        variation of the amplitude with time is called amplitude modulation.
        Solve the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                u + u = 0.5 cos 0.8t,       u(0) = 0,    u (0) = 0,       (22)
   3
        and plot the solution.
   In this case ω0 = 1, ω = 0.8, and F0 = 0.5, so from Eq. (21) the solution of the given
problem is
                                   u = 2.77778(sin 0.1t)(sin 0.9t).                         (23)
A graph of this solution is shown in Figure 3.8.7. The amplitude variation has a slow frequency
of 0.1 and a corresponding slow period of 20π. Note that a half-period of 10π corresponds to a
single cycle of increasing and then decreasing amplitude. The displacement of the spring–mass
system oscillates with a relatively fast frequency of 0.9, which is only slightly less than the
natural frequency ω0 .
   Now imagine that the forcing frequency ω is increased, say, to ω = 0.9. Then the slow
frequency is halved to 0.05, and the corresponding slow half-period is doubled to 20π. The
multiplier 2.7778 also increases substantially, to 5.2632. However, the fast frequency is only
marginally increased, to 0.95. Can you visualize what happens as ω takes on values closer and
closer to the natural frequency ω0 = 1?
              u
                              u = 2.77778 sin 0.1t
               3                         u = 2.77778 sin 0.1t sin 0.9t
               2
               1
                          10         20        30         40          50       60         t
            –1
            –2
                                       u = –2.77778 sin 0.1t
            –3
                          FIGURE 3.8.7 A beat; solution of Eq. (22):
           u + u = 0.5 cos 0.8t, u(0) = 0, u (0) = 0; u = 2.77778(sin 0.1t)(sin 0.9t).
   Now let us return to Eq. (17) and consider the case of resonance, where ω = ω0 ;
that is, the frequency of the forcing function is the same as the natural frequency of the
system. Then the nonhomogeneous term F0 cos ωt is a solution of the homogeneous
equation. In this case the solution of Eq. (17) is
                                                             F0
                         u = c1 cos ω0 t + c2 sin ω0 t +          t sin ω0 t.               (24)
                                                           2mω0
Consider the following example.
        Solve the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
   4                               u + u = 0.5 cos t,      u(0) = 0,     u (0) = 0,               (25)
        and plot the graph of the solution.
          The general solution of the differential equation is
                                          u = c1 cos t + c2 sin t + 0.25t sin t,
        and the initial conditions require that c1 = c2 = 0. Thus the solution of the given initial value
        problem is
                                                   u = 0.25t sin t.                                  (26)
        The graph of the solution is shown in Figure 3.8.8.
                     u
                    10
                                               u = 0.25t sin t
                      5         u = 0.25 t
                                        10               20                 30           40    t
                    –5        u = – 0.25 t
                   –10
                                 FIGURE 3.8.8 Resonance; solution of Eq. (25):
                             u + u = 0.5 cos t, u(0) = 0, u (0) = 0; u = 0.25t sin t.
           Because of the term t sin ω0 t, the solution (24) predicts that the motion will become
        unbounded as t → ∞ regardless of the values of c1 and c2 , and Figure 3.8.8 bears this
        out. Of course, in reality, unbounded oscillations do not occur, because the spring
        cannot stretch infinitely far. Moreover, as soon as u becomes large, the mathemat-
        ical model on which Eq. (17) is based is no longer valid, since the assumption that
        the spring force depends linearly on the displacement requires that u be small. As
        we have seen, if damping is included in the model, the predicted motion remains
        bounded; however, the response to the input function F0 cos ωt may be quite large if
        the damping is small and ω is close to ω0 .
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4, write the given expression as a product of two trigonometric
         functions of different frequencies.
          1. cos 9t − cos 7t                                  2. sin 7t − sin 6t
          3. cos πt + cos 2πt                                 4. sin 3t + sin 4t
          5. A mass weighing 4 lb stretches a spring 1.5 in. The mass is given a positive displacement of
             2 in from its equilibrium position and released with no initial velocity. Assuming that there
             is no damping and that the mass is acted on by an external force of 2 cos 3t lb, formulate
             the initial value problem describing the motion of the mass.
          6. A mass of 5 kg stretches a spring 10 cm. The mass is acted on by an external force of
             10 sin(t/2) N (newtons) and moves in a medium that imparts a viscous force of 2 N
             when the speed of the mass is 4 cm/s. If the mass is set in motion from its equilibrium
             position with an initial velocity of 3 cm/s, formulate the initial value problem describing
             the motion of the mass.
          7. (a) Find the solution of Problem 5.
             (b) Plot the graph of the solution.
             (c) If the given external force is replaced by a force 4 sin ωt of frequency ω, find the value
             of ω for which resonance occurs.
          8. (a) Find the solution of the initial value problem in Problem 6.
             (b) Identify the transient and steady state parts of the solution.
             (c) Plot the graph of the steady state solution.
             (d) If the given external force is replaced by a force of 2 cos ωt of frequency ω, find the
             value of ω for which the amplitude of the forced response is maximum.
          9. If an undamped spring–mass system with a mass that weighs 6 lb and a spring constant
             1 lb/in is suddenly set in motion at t = 0 by an external force of 4 cos 7t lb, determine the
             position of the mass at any time, and draw a graph of the displacement versus t.
         10. A mass that weighs 8 lb stretches a spring 6 in. The system is acted on by an external force
             of 8 sin 8t lb. If the mass is pulled down 3 in and then released, determine the position of the
             mass at any time. Determine the first four times at which the velocity of the mass is zero.
         11. A spring is stretched 6 in by a mass that weighs 8 lb. The mass is attached to a dashpot
             mechanism that has a damping constant of 0.25 lb·s/ft and is acted on by an external force
             of 4 cos 2t lb.
             (a) Determine the steady state response of this system.
             (b) If the given mass is replaced by a mass m, determine the value of m for which the
             amplitude of the steady state response is maximum.
         12. A spring–mass system has a spring constant of 3 N/m. A mass of 2 kg is attached to the
             spring, and the motion takes place in a viscous fluid that offers a resistance numerically
             equal to the magnitude of the instantaneous velocity. If the system is driven by an external
             force of (3 cos 3t − 2 sin 3t) N, determine the steady state response. Express your answer
             in the form R cos(ωt − δ).
         13. In this problem we ask you to supply some of the details in the analysis of a forced damped
             oscillator.
             (a) Derive Eqs. (10), (11), and (12) for the steady state solution of Eq. (8).
             (b) Derive the expression in Eq. (13) for Rk/F0 .
             (c) Show that ωmax   2
                                     and Rmax are given by Eqs. (14) and (15), respectively.
         14. Find the velocity of the steady state response given by Eq. (10). Then show that the velocity
             is maximum when ω = ω0 .
15. Find the solution of the initial value problem
                               u + u = F(t),       u(0) = 0,   u (0) = 0,
    where                                 ⎧
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎨F0 t,            0 ≤ t ≤ π,
                                   F(t) = F0 (2π − t),     π < t ≤ 2π,
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎩0,                   2π < t.
    Hint: Treat each time interval separately, and match the solutions in the different
    intervals by requiring u and u to be continuous functions of t.
16. A series circuit has a capacitor of 0.25 × 10−6 F, a resistor of 5 × 103 , and an inductor of
    1 H. The initial charge on the capacitor is zero. If a 12-volt battery is connected to the cir-
    cuit and the circuit is closed at t = 0, determine the charge on the capacitor at t = 0.001 s,
    at t = 0.01 s, and at any time t. Also determine the limiting charge as t → ∞.
17. Consider a vibrating system described by the initial value problem
                         u + 14 u + 2u = 2 cos ωt,     u(0) = 0,      u (0) = 2.
    (a) Determine the steady state part of the solution of this problem.
    (b) Find the amplitude A of the steady state solution in terms of ω.
    (c) Plot A versus ω.
    (d) Find the maximum value of A and the frequency ω for which it occurs.
18. Consider the forced but undamped system described by the initial value problem
                             u + u = 3 cos ωt,      u(0) = 0,    u (0) = 0.
    (a) Find the solution u(t) for ω  = 1.
    (b) Plot the solution u(t) versus t for ω = 0.7, ω = 0.8, and ω = 0.9. Describe how the
    response u(t) changes as ω varies in this interval. What happens as ω takes on val-
    ues closer and closer to 1? Note that the natural frequency of the unforced system
    is ω0 = 1.
19. Consider the vibrating system described by the initial value problem
                             u + u = 3 cos ωt,      u(0) = 1,    u (0) = 1.
    (a) Find the solution for ω  = 1.
    (b) Plot the solution u(t) versus t for ω = 0.7, ω = 0.8, and ω = 0.9. Compare the results
    with those of Problem 18; that is, describe the effect of the nonzero initial conditions.
20. For the initial value problem in Problem 18, plot u versus u for ω = 0.7, ω = 0.8, and
    ω = 0.9. Such a plot is called a phase plot. Use a t interval that is long enough so that the
    phase plot appears as a closed curve. Mark your curve with arrows to show the direction
    in which it is traversed as t increases.
Problems 21 through 23 deal with the initial value problem
                      u + 0.125u + 4u = F(t),        u(0) = 2,     u (0) = 0.
In each of these problems:
(a) Plot the given forcing function F(t) versus t, and also plot the solution u(t) versus t on the
same set of axes. Use a t interval that is long enough so the initial transients are substantially
eliminated. Observe the relation between the amplitude        and phase of the forcing term and
the amplitude and phase of the response. Note that ω0 = k/m = 2.
(b) Draw the phase plot of the solution; that is, plot u versus u.
           21. F(t) = 3 cos(t/4)
           22. F(t) = 3 cos 2t
           23. F(t) = 3 cos 6t
           24. A spring–mass system with a hardening spring (Problem 32 of Section 3.7) is acted on by
               a periodic external force. In the absence of damping, suppose that the displacement of the
               mass satisfies the initial value problem
                                       u + u + 15 u3 = cos ωt,      u(0) = 0,   u (0) = 0.
               (a) Let ω = 1 and plot a computer-generated solution of the given problem. Does the
               system exhibit a beat?
               (b) Plot the solution for several values of ω between 1/2 and 2. Describe how the solution
               changes as ω increases.
           25. Suppose that the system of Problem 24 is modified to include a damping term and that
               the resulting initial value problem is
                                   u + 15 u + u + 15 u3 = cos ωt,      u(0) = 0,   u (0) = 0.
               (a) Plot a computer-generated solution of the given problem for several values of ω
               between 1/2 and 2, and estimate the amplitude R of the steady response in each case.
               (b) Using the data from part (a), plot the graph of R versus ω. For what frequency ω is
               the amplitude greatest?
               (c) Compare the results of parts (a) and (b) with the corresponding results for the linear
               spring.
REFERENCES Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
             Hall, 1961; New York: Dover, 1989).
             There are many books on mechanical vibrations and electric circuits. One that deals with both is
           Close, C. M., and Frederick, D. K., Modeling and Analysis of Dynamic Systems (3rd ed.) (New York:Wiley,
             2001).
             A classic book on mechanical vibrations is
           Den Hartog, J. P., Mechanical Vibrations (4th ed.) (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1956; New York; Dover, 1985).
             A more recent, intermediate-level book is
           Thomson, W. T., Theory of Vibrations with Applications (5th ed.) (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
             1997).
             An elementary book on electric circuits is
           Bobrow, L. S., Elementary Linear Circuit Analysis (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996).
 CHAPTER
     4
               Higher Order Linear
               Equations
              The theoretical structure and methods of solution developed in the preceding chapter
               for second order linear equations extend directly to linear equations of third and
               higher order. In this chapter we briefly review this generalization, taking particular
               note of those instances where new phenomena may appear, because of the greater
               variety of situations that can occur for equations of higher order.
4.1 General Theory of nth Order Linear Equations
              An nth order linear differential equation is an equation of the form
                                    dn y            dn−1 y                     dy
                             P0 (t)       + P 1 (t)         + · · · + Pn−1 (t)    + Pn (t)y = G(t).    (1)
                                    dt n             dt n−1                    dt
              We assume that the functions P0 , . . . , Pn , and G are continuous real-valued functions
               on some interval I: α < t < β, and that P0 is nowhere zero in this interval. Then,
               dividing Eq. (1) by P0 (t), we obtain
                                      dn y             dn−1 y                    dy
                            L[y] =        n
                                            +  p 1 (t)    n−1
                                                              + · · · + pn−1 (t)    + pn (t)y = g(t).  (2)
                                       dt              dt                        dt
              The linear differential operator L of order n defined by Eq. (2) is similar to the second
               order operator introduced in Chapter 3. The mathematical theory associated with
               Eq. (2) is completely analogous to that for the second order linear equation; for this
               reason we simply state the results for the nth order problem. The proofs of most of
               the results are also similar to those for the second order equation and are usually left
               as exercises.
                                                                                                      221
                 Since Eq. (2) involves the nth derivative of y with respect to t, it will, so to speak,
              require n integrations to solve Eq. (2). Each of these integrations introduces an
              arbitrary constant. Hence we expect that to obtain a unique solution it is necessary
              to specify n initial conditions
                                     y(t0 ) = y0 ,    y (t0 ) = y0 ,     ...,     y(n−1) (t0 ) = y(n−1)
                                                                                                    0     ,              (3)
              where t0 may be any point in the interval I and y0 , y0 , . . . , y(n−1)       0    is any set of prescribed
              real constants. The following theorem, which is similar to Theorem 3.2.1, guarantees
              that the initial value problem (2), (3) has a solution and that it is unique.
Theorem 4.1.1 If the functions p1 , p2 , . . . , pn , and g are continuous on the open interval I, then there
              exists exactly one solution y = φ(t) of the differential equation (2) that also satisfies
              the initial conditions (3), where t0 is any point in I. This solution exists throughout
              the interval I.
                 We will not give a proof of this theorem here. However, if the coefficients p1 , . . . , pn
              are constants, then we can construct the solution of the initial value problem (2), (3)
              much as in Chapter 3;see Sections 4.2 through 4.4. Even though we may find a solution
              in this case, we do not know that it is unique without the use of Theorem 4.1.1. A
              proof of the theorem can be found in Ince (Section 3.32) or Coddington (Chapter 6).
              The Homogeneous Equation. As in the corresponding second order problem, we first
              discuss the homogeneous equation
                                    L[y] = y(n) + p1 (t)y(n−1) + · · · + pn−1 (t)y + pn (t)y = 0.                       (4)
              If the functions y1 , y2 , . . . , yn are solutions of Eq. (4), then it follows by direct
              computation that the linear combination
                                              y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) + · · · + cn yn (t),                             (5)
              where c1 , . . . , cn are arbitrary constants, is also a solution of Eq. (4). It is then natural
              to ask whether every solution of Eq. (4) can be expressed as a linear combination
              of y1 , . . . , yn . This will be true if, regardless of the initial conditions (3) that are
              prescribed, it is possible to choose the constants c1 , . . . , cn so that the linear com-
              bination (5) satisfies the initial conditions. That is, for any choice of the point t0 in I,
              and for any choice of y0 , y0 , . . . , y(n−1)
                                                           0       , we must be able to determine c1 , . . . , cn so that
              the equations
                                                      c1 y1 (t0 ) + · · · + cn yn (t0 ) = y0
                                                      c1 y1 (t0 ) + · · · + cn yn (t0 ) = y0
                                                                                          ..                             (6)
                                                                                           .
                                             c1 y(n−1)
                                                 1     (t0 ) + · · · + cn y(n−1)
                                                                             n      (t0 ) = y(n−1)
                                                                                              0
              are satisfied. Equations (6) can be solved uniquely for the constants c1 , . . . , cn ,
              provided that the determinant of coefficients is not zero. On the other hand, if the
              determinant of coefficients is zero, then it is always possible to choose values of
              y0 , y0 , . . . , y(n−1)
                                  0     so that Eqs. (6) do not have a solution. Therefore a necessary and
              sufficient condition for the existence of a solution of Eqs. (6) for arbitrary values of
              y0 , y0 , . . . , y(n−1)
                                  0     is that the Wronskian
                                                                                                             
                                                               y1
                                                                              y2         ···          yn 
                                                               y
                                                                1             y2        ···          yn 
                                        W(y1 , . . . , yn ) =  .              .                       ..          (7)
                                                                                                              
                                                                ..             ..                       .    
                                                                (n−1)                                        
                                                               y              y(n−1)     ···          y(n−1)
                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                              
                                                                   1              2
              is not zero at t = t0 . Since t0 can be any point in the interval I, it is necessary and
              sufficient that W(y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ) be nonzero at every point in the interval. Just as for
              the second order linear equation, it can be shown that if y1 , y2 , . . . , yn are solutions
              of Eq. (4), then W(y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ) either is zero for every t in the interval I or else is
              never zero there; see Problem 20. Hence we have the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1.2 If the functions p1 , p2 , . . . , pn are continuous on the open interval I, if the functions
              y1 , y2 , . . . , yn are solutions of Eq. (4), and if W(y1 , y2 , . . . , yn )(t)  = 0 for at least one
              point in I, then every solution of Eq. (4) can be expressed as a linear combination
              of the solutions y1 , y2 , . . . , yn .
                 A set of solutions y1 , . . . , yn of Eq. (4) whose Wronskian is nonzero is referred to
              as a fundamental set of solutions. The existence of a fundamental set of solutions can
              be demonstrated in precisely the same way as for the second order linear equation
              (see Theorem 3.2.5). Since all solutions of Eq. (4) are of the form (5), we use the term
              general solution to refer to an arbitrary linear combination of any fundamental set
              of solutions of Eq. (4).
              Linear Dependence and Independence. We now explore the relationship between funda-
              mental sets of solutions and the concept of linear independence, a central idea in the
              study of linear algebra. The functions f1 , f2 , . . . , fn are said to be linearly dependent
              on an interval I if there exists a set of constants k1 , k2 , . . . , kn , not all zero, such that
                                                  k1 f1 (t) + k2 f2 (t) + · · · + kn fn (t) = 0                      (8)
              for all t in I. The functions f1 , . . . , fn are said to be linearly independent on I if they
              are not linearly dependent there.
              Determine whether the functions f1 (t) = 1, f2 (t) = t, and f3 (t) = t 2 are linearly independent or
 EXAMPLE      dependent on the interval I : −∞ < t < ∞.
      1          Form the linear combination
                                               k1 f1 (t) + k2 f2 (t) + k3 f3 (t) = k1 + k2 t + k3 t 2 ,
              and set it equal to zero to obtain
                                                               k1 + k2 t + k3 t 2 = 0.                               (9)
        If Eq. (9) is to hold for all t in I, then it must certainly be true at any three distinct points in I.
        Any three points will serve our purpose, but it is convenient to choose t = 0, t = 1, and t = −1.
        Evaluating Eq. (9) at each of these points, we obtain the system of equations
                                                          k1               = 0,
                                                          k1 + k2 + k3 = 0,                                  (10)
                                                          k1 − k2 + k3 = 0.
        From the first of Eqs. (10) we note that k1 = 0; then from the other two equations it follows
        that k2 = k3 = 0 as well. Therefore, there is no set of constants k1 , k2 , k3 , not all zero, for
        which Eq. (9) holds even at the three chosen points, much less throughout I. Thus the given
        functions are not linearly dependent on I, so they must be linearly independent. Indeed, they
        are linearly independent on any interval.This can be established just as in this example,possibly
        using a different set of three points.
        Determine whether the functions
EXAMPLE
                            f1 (t) = 1,    f2 (t) = 2 + t,      f3 (t) = 3 − t 2 ,   and  f4 (t) = 4t + t 2
   2
        are linearly independent or dependent on any interval I.
           Form the linear combination
        k1 f1 (t) + k2 f2 (t) + k3 f3 (t) + k4 f4 (t) = k1 + k2 (2 + t) + k3 (3 − t 2 ) + k4 (4t + t 2 )
                                                       = (k1 + 2k2 + 3k3 ) + (k2 + 4k4 )t + (−k3 + k4 )t 2 . (11)
        For this expression to be zero throughout an interval, it is certainly sufficient to require that
                                   k1 + 2k2 + 3k3 = 0,           k2 + 4k4 = 0,       −k3 + k4 = 0.
        These three equations, with four unknowns, have many solutions. For instance, if k4 = 1, then
        k3 = 1, k2 = −4, and k1 = 5. If we use these values for the coefficients in Eq. (11), then we
        have
                                                 5f1 (t) − 4f2 (t) + f3 (t) + f4 (t) = 0
        for each value of t. Thus the given functions are linearly dependent on every interval.
           The concept of linear independence provides an alternative characterization of
        fundamental sets of solutions of the homogeneous equation (4). Suppose that the
        functions y1 , . . . , yn are solutions of Eq. (4) on an interval I, and consider the equation
                                                  k1 y1 (t) + · · · + kn yn (t) = 0.                         (12)
        By differentiating Eq. (12) repeatedly, we obtain the additional n − 1 equations
                                                       k1 y1 (t) + · · · + kn yn (t) = 0,
                                                                                       ..
                                                                                        .                    (13)
                                            k1 y(n−1)
                                                  1     (t) + · · · + kn y(n−1)
                                                                            n      (t) = 0.
        The system consisting of Eqs. (12) and (13) is a system of n linear algebraic equations
        for the n unknowns k1 , . . . , kn . The determinant of coefficients for this system is the
        Wronskian W(y1 , . . . , yn )(t) of y1 , . . . , yn . This leads to the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1.3 If y1 (t), . . . , yn (t) is a fundamental set of solutions of Eq. (4)
                                    L[y] = y(n) + p1 (t)y(n−1) + · · · + pn−1 (t)y + pn (t)y = 0
              on an interval I, then y1 (t), . . . , yn (t) are linearly independent on I. Conversely, if
              y1 (t), . . . , yn (t) are linearly independent solutions of Eq. (4) on I, then they form a
              fundamental set of solutions on I.
                 To prove this theorem, first suppose that y1 (t), . . . , yn (t) is a fundamental set of
              solutions of Eq. (4) on I. Then the Wronskian W(y1 , . . . , yn )(t)  = 0 for every t in
              I. Hence the system (12), (13) has only the solution k1 = · · · = kn = 0 for every t
              in I. Thus y1 (t), . . . , yn (t) cannot be linearly dependent on I and must therefore be
              linearly independent there.
                 To demonstrate the converse, let y1 (t), . . . , yn (t) be linearly independent on I. To
              show that they form a fundamental set of solutions, we need to show that their
              Wronskian is never zero in I. Suppose that this is not true; then there is at least one
              point t0 where the Wronskian is zero. At this point the system (12), (13) has a nonzero
              solution; let us denote it by k1∗ , . . . , kn∗ . Now form the linear combination
                                                  φ(t) = k1∗ y1 (t) + · · · + kn∗ yn (t).                   (14)
              Then φ(t) satisfies the initial value problem
                                  L[y] = 0,       y(t0 ) = 0,   y (t0 ) = 0,    ...,     y(n−1) (t0 ) = 0. (15)
              The function φ satisfies the differential equation because it is a linear combination of
              solutions; it satisfies the initial conditions because these are just the equations in the
              system (12), (13) evaluated at t0 . However, the function y(t) = 0 for all t in I is also
              a solution of this initial value problem, and by Theorem 4.1.1, the solution is unique.
              Thus φ(t) = 0 for all t in I. Consequently, y1 (t), . . . , yn (t) are linearly dependent on
              I, which is a contradiction. Hence the assumption that there is a point where the
              Wronskian is zero is untenable. Therefore, the Wronskian is never zero on I, as was
              to be proved.
                 Note that for a set of functions f1 , . . . , fn that are not solutions of Eq. (4), the con-
              verse part of Theorem 4.1.3 is not necessarily true. They may be linearly independent
              on I even though the Wronskian is zero at some points, or even every point, but
              with different sets of constants k1 , . . . , kn at different points. See Problem 25 for an
              example.
              The Nonhomogeneous Equation. Now consider the nonhomogeneous equation (2)
                                          L[y] = y(n) + p1 (t)y(n−1) + · · · + pn (t)y = g(t).
              If Y1 and Y2 are any two solutions of Eq. (2), then it follows immediately from the
              linearity of the operator L that
                                    L[Y1 − Y2 ](t) = L[Y1 ](t) − L[Y2 ](t) = g(t) − g(t) = 0.
              Hence the difference of any two solutions of the nonhomogeneous equation (2) is a
              solution of the homogeneous equation (4). Since any solution of the homogeneous
         equation can be expressed as a linear combination of a fundamental set of solutions
         y1 , . . . , yn , it follows that any solution of Eq. (2) can be written as
                                           y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) + · · · + cn yn (t) + Y(t),                (16)
         where Y is some particular solution of the nonhomogeneous equation (2). The linear
         combination (16) is called the general solution of the nonhomogeneous equation (2).
            Thus the primary problem is to determine a fundamental set of solutions y1 , . . . , yn
         of the homogeneous equation (4). If the coefficients are constants, this is a fairly
         simple problem; it is discussed in the next section. If the coefficients are not constants,
         it is usually necessary to use numerical methods such as those in Chapter 8 or series
         methods similar to those in Chapter 5. These tend to become more cumbersome as
         the order of the equation increases.
            To find a particular solution Y(t) in Eq. (16), the methods of undetermined coef-
         ficients and variation of parameters are again available. They are discussed and
         illustrated in Sections 4.3 and 4.4, respectively.
            The method of reduction of order (Section 3.4) also applies to nth order linear
         equations. If y1 is one solution of Eq. (4), then the substitution y = v(t)y1 (t) leads to
         a linear differential equation of order n − 1 for v (see Problem 26 for the case when
         n = 3). However, if n ≥ 3, the reduced equation is itself at least of second order, and
         only rarely will it be significantly simpler than the original equation. Thus, in practice,
         reduction of order is seldom useful for equations of higher than second order.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, determine intervals in which solutions are sure to exist.
           1. y(4) + 4y + 3y = t                                      2. ty + (sin t)y + 3y = cos t
                              (4)    t 
           3. t(t − 1)y + e y + 4t y = 0          2
                                                                         4. y + ty + t 2 y + t 3 y = ln t
                             (4)               
           5. (x − 1)y + (x + 1)y + (tan x)y = 0                         6. (x2 − 4)y(6) + x2 y + 9y = 0
         In each of Problems 7 through 10, determine whether the given functions are linearly depen-
         dent or linearly independent. If they are linearly dependent, find a linear relation among
         them.
           7. f1 (t) = 2t − 3, f2 (t) = t 2 + 1, f3 (t) = 2t 2 − t
           8. f1 (t) = 2t − 3, f2 (t) = 2t 2 + 1, f3 (t) = 3t 2 + t
           9. f1 (t) = 2t − 3, f2 (t) = t 2 + 1, f3 (t) = 2t 2 − t, f4 (t) = t 2 + t + 1
         10. f1 (t) = 2t − 3, f2 (t) = t 3 + 1, f3 (t) = 2t 2 − t, f4 (t) = t 2 + t + 1
         In each of Problems 11 through 16, verify that the given functions are solutions of the
         differential equation, and determine their Wronskian.
         11. y + y = 0;              1, cos t, sin t
         12. y(4) + y = 0;              1, t, cos t, sin t
         13. y + 2y − y − 2y = 0;                et , e−t , e−2t
                 (4)             
         14. y + 2y + y = 0;                        1, t, e−t , te−t
                         
         15. xy − y = 0;                    1, x, x3
                 3          2        
         16. x y + x y − 2xy + 2y = 0;                       x, x2 , 1/x
         17. Show that W(5, sin t, cos 2t) = 0 for all t. Can you establish this result without direct
                                             2
               evaluation of the Wronskian?
         18. Verify that the differential operator defined by
                                                     L[y] = y(n) + p1 (t)y(n−1) + · · · + pn (t)y
    is a linear differential operator. That is, show that
                                         L[c1 y1 + c2 y2 ] = c1 L[y1 ] + c2 L[y2 ],
    where y1 and y2 are n-times-differentiable functions and c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants.
    Hence, show that if y1 , y2 , . . . , yn are solutions of L[y] = 0, then the linear combination
    c1 y1 + · · · + cn yn is also a solution of L[y] = 0.
19. Let the linear differential operator L be defined by
                                         L[y] = a0 y(n) + a1 y(n−1) + · · · + an y,
    where a0 , a1 , . . . , an are real constants.
    (a) Find L[t n ].
    (b) Find L[ert ].
    (c) Determine four solutions of the equation y(4) − 5y + 4y = 0. Do you think the four
    solutions form a fundamental set of solutions? Why?
20. In this problem we show how to generalize Theorem 3.2.7 (Abel’s theorem) to higher
    order equations. We first outline the procedure for the third order equation
                                         y + p1 (t)y + p2 (t)y + p3 (t)y = 0.
    Let y1 , y2 , and y3 be solutions of this equation on an interval I.
    (a) If W = W(y1 , y2 , y3 ), show that
                                                                               
                                                             y1 y2 y3 
                                                                               
                                                                              
                                                        
                                                    W = 1                   
                                                              y     y 2     y 3 .
                                                                               
                                                             y y y 
                                                               1      2       3
    Hint: The derivative of a 3-by-3 determinant is the sum of three 3-by-3 determinants
    obtained by differentiating the first, second, and third rows, respectively.
    (b) Substitute for y                 
                               1 , y2 , and y3 from the differential equation; multiply the first row by
    p3 , multiply the second row by p2 , and add these to the last row to obtain
                                                          W  = −p1 (t)W.
    (c) Show that                                                                       
                                        W(y1 , y2 , y3 )(t) = c exp − p1 (t) dt .
    It follows that W is either always zero or nowhere zero on I.
    (d) Generalize this argument to the nth order equation
                                         y(n) + p1 (t)y(n−1) + · · · + pn (t)y = 0
    with solutions y1 , . . . , yn . That is, establish Abel’s formula
                                                                                          
                                        W(y1 , . . . , yn )(t) = c exp − p1 (t) dt
    for this case.
In each of Problems 21 through 24, use Abel’s formula (Problem 20) to find the Wronskian of
a fundamental set of solutions of the given differential equation.
21. y + 2y − y − 3y = 0                                    22. y(4) + y = 0
                
23. ty + 2y − y + ty = 0                                         24. t 2 y(4) + ty + y − 4y = 0
             25. (a) Show that the functions f (t) = t 2 |t| and g(t) = t 3 are linearly dependent on
                  0 < t < 1 and on −1 < t < 0.
                  (b) Show that f (t) and g(t) are linearly independent on −1 < t < 1.
                  (c) Show that W(f , g)(t) is zero for all t in −1 < t < 1.
             26. Show that if y1 is a solution of
                                                        y + p1 (t)y + p2 (t)y + p3 (t)y = 0,
                  then the substitution y = y1 (t)v(t) leads to the following second order equation for v :
                                             y1 v + (3y1 + p1 y1 )v + (3y1 + 2p1 y1 + p2 y1 )v = 0.
             In each of Problems 27 and 28, use the method of reduction of order (Problem 26) to solve
             the given differential equation.
             27. (2 − t)y + (2t − 3)y − ty + y = 0, t < 2;                    y1 (t) = et
                                                               
             28. t (t + 3)y − 3t(t + 2)y + 6(1 + t)y − 6y = 0, t > 0;
                   2
                                                                                                 y1 (t) = t 2 , y2 (t) = t 3
4.2 Homogeneous Equations with Constant Coefficients
             Consider the nth order linear homogeneous differential equation
                                          L[y] = a0 y(n) + a1 y(n−1) + · · · + an−1 y + an y = 0,                              (1)
             where a0 , a1 , . . . , an are real constants and a0  = 0. From our knowledge of second
             order linear equations with constant coefficients, it is natural to anticipate that y = ert
             is a solution of Eq. (1) for suitable values of r. Indeed,
                                     L[ert ] = ert (a0 r n + a1 r n−1 + · · · + an−1 r + an ) = ert Z(r)                        (2)
             for all r, where
                                              Z(r) = a0 r n + a1 r n−1 + · · · + an−1 r + an .                                  (3)
             For those values of r for which Z(r) = 0, it follows that L[e ] = 0 and y = e is a       rt                     rt
             solution of Eq. (1). The polynomial Z(r) is called the characteristic polynomial, and
             the equation Z(r) = 0 is the characteristic equation of the differential equation (1).
             Since a0  = 0, we know that Z(r) is a polynomial of degree n and therefore has n zeros,1
             say, r1 , r2 , . . . , rn , some of which may be equal. Hence we can write the characteristic
             polynomial in the form
                                                  Z(r) = a0 (r − r1 )(r − r2 ) · · · (r − rn ).                                 (4)
             1An important question in mathematics for more than 200 years was whether every polynomial equation
             has at least one root. The affirmative answer to this question, the fundamental theorem of algebra, was
             given by Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) in his doctoral dissertation in 1799, although his proof does
             not meet modern standards of rigor. Several other proofs have been discovered since, including three by
             Gauss himself. Today, students often meet the fundamental theorem of algebra in a first course on complex
             variables, where it can be established as a consequence of some of the basic properties of complex analytic
             functions.
        Real and Unequal Roots. If the roots of the characteristic equation are real and no
        two are equal, then we have n distinct solutions er1 t , er2 t , . . . , ern t of Eq. (1). If these
        functions are linearly independent, then the general solution of Eq. (1) is
                                          y = c1 er1 t + c2 er2 t + · · · + cn ern t .                   (5)
        One way to establish the linear independence of er1 t , er2 t , . . . , ern t is to evaluate their
        Wronskian determinant. Another way is outlined in Problem 40.
        Find the general solution of
EXAMPLE
                                              y(4) + y − 7y − y + 6y = 0.                          (6)
   1    Also find the solution that satisfies the initial conditions
                             y(0) = 1,         y (0) = 0,         y (0) = −2,          y (0) = −1  (7)
        and plot its graph.
          Assuming that y = ert , we must determine r by solving the polynomial equation
                                                  r 4 + r 3 − 7r 2 − r + 6 = 0.                          (8)
        The roots of this equation are r1 = 1, r2 = −1, r3 = 2, and r4 = −3. Therefore, the general
        solution of Eq. (6) is
                                             y = c1 et + c2 e−t + c3 e2t + c4 e−3t .                     (9)
         The initial conditions (7) require that c1 , . . . , c4 satisfy the four equations
                                                c1 + c2 + c3 +           c4 =     1,
                                                c1 − c2 + 2c3 − 3c4 =             0,
                                                                                                        (10)
                                                c1 + c2 + 4c3 + 9c4 = −2,
                                                c1 − c2 + 8c3 − 27c4 = −1.
        By solving this system of four linear algebraic equations, we find that
                                  c1 = 118 ,        c2 = 125 ,      c3 = − 23 ,         c4 = − 18 .
        Thus the solution of the initial value problem is
                                             y = 11  8
                                                       et + 125 e−t − 23 e2t − 18 e−3t .                (11)
        The graph of the solution is shown in Figure 4.2.1.
                                      y
                                      1
                                                            0.5                   1                 t
                                     –1
                          FIGURE 4.2.1 Solution of the initial value problem (6), (7):
                y(4) + y − 7y − y + 6y = 0, y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0, y (0) = −2, y (0) = −1.
   As Example 1 illustrates, the procedure for solving an nth order linear differential
equation with constant coefficients depends on finding the roots of a corresponding
nth degree polynomial equation. If initial conditions are prescribed, then a system
of n linear algebraic equations must be solved to determine the proper values of
the constants c1 , . . . , cn . Each of these tasks becomes much more complicated as n
increases, and we have omitted the detailed calculations in Example 1. Computer
assistance can be very helpful in such problems.
   For third and fourth degree polynomials there are formulas,2 analogous to the
formula for quadratic equations but more complicated,that give exact expressions for
the roots. Root-finding algorithms are readily available on calculators and computers.
Sometimes they are included in the differential equation solver, so that the process of
factoring the characteristic polynomial is hidden and the solution of the differential
equation is produced automatically.
   If you are faced with the need to factor the characteristic polynomial by hand, here
is one result that is sometimes helpful. Suppose that the polynomial
                               a0 r n + a1 r n−1 + · · · + an−1 r + an = 0                           (12)
has integer coefficients. If r = p/q is a rational root, where p and q have no common
factors, then p must be a factor of an , and q must be a factor of a0 . For example, in
Eq. (8) the factors of a0 are ±1 and the factors of an are ±1, ±2, ±3, and ±6. Thus
the only possible rational roots of this equation are ±1, ±2, ±3, and ±6. By testing
these possible roots, we find that 1, −1, 2, and −3 are actual roots. In this case there
are no other roots, since the polynomial is of fourth degree. If some of the roots are
irrational or complex, as is usually the case, then this process will not find them, but
at least the degree of the polynomial can be reduced by dividing the polynomial by
the factors corresponding to the rational roots.
   If the roots of the characteristic equation are real and different, we have seen
that the general solution (5) is simply a sum of exponential functions. For large values
of t the solution is dominated by the term corresponding to the algebraically largest
root. If this root is positive, then solutions become exponentially unbounded, whereas
if it is negative, then solutions tend exponentially to zero. Finally, if the largest root
is zero, then solutions approach a nonzero constant as t becomes large. Of course,
for certain initial conditions, the coefficient of the otherwise dominant term may be
zero; then the nature of the solution for large t is determined by the next largest root.
Complex Roots. If the characteristic equation has complex roots, they must occur in
conjugate pairs, λ ± iμ, since the coefficients a0 , a1 , a2 , . . . , an are real numbers. Pro-
vided that none of the roots is repeated, the general solution of Eq. (1) is still of the
2The method for solving the cubic equation was apparently discovered by Scipione dal Ferro (1465–
1526) about 1500, although it was first published in 1545 by Girolamo Cardano (1501–1576) in his Ars
Magna. This book also contains a method for solving quartic equations that Cardano attributes to his pupil
Ludovico Ferrari (1522–1565). The question of whether analogous formulas exist for the roots of higher
degree equations remained open for more than two centuries, until 1826, when Niels Abel showed that
no general solution formulas can exist for polynomial equations of degree five or higher. A more general
theory was developed by Evariste Galois (1811–1832) in 1831, but unfortunately it did not become widely
known for several decades.
        form of Eq. (5). However, just as for the second order equation (Section 3.3), we can
        replace the complex-valued solutions e(λ+iμ)t and e(λ−iμ)t by the real-valued solutions
                                                eλt cos μt,       eλt sin μt                           (13)
        obtained as the real and imaginary parts of e(λ+iμ)t . Thus, even though some of
        the roots of the characteristic equation are complex, it is still possible to express the
        general solution of Eq. (1) as a linear combination of real-valued solutions.
        Find the general solution of
EXAMPLE                                                y(4) − y = 0.                                   (14)
   2    Also find the solution that satisfies the initial conditions
                          y(0) = 7/2,        y (0) = −4,       y (0) = 5/2,       y (0) = −2     (15)
        and draw its graph.
            Substituting ert for y, we find that the characteristic equation is
                                             r 4 − 1 = (r 2 − 1)(r 2 + 1) = 0.
        Therefore, the roots are r = 1, −1, i, −i, and the general solution of Eq. (14) is
                                         y = c1 et + c2 e−t + c3 cos t + c4 sin t.
        If we impose the initial conditions (15), we obtain
                                   c1 = 0,        c2 = 3,      c3 = 1/2,        c4 = −1;
        thus the solution of the given initial value problem is
                                                 y = 3e−t + 21 cos t − sin t.                          (16)
        The graph of this solution is shown in Figure 4.2.2.
                                         y
                                         2
                                                  2   4     6     8     10 12      14 t
                                        –2
                         FIGURE 4.2.2 Solution of the initial value problem (14), (15):
                        y(4) − y = 0, y(0) = 7/2, y (0) = −4, y (0) = 5/2, y (0) = −2.
            Observe that the initial conditions (15) cause the coefficient c1 of the exponentially growing
        term in the general solution to be zero. Therefore, this term is absent in the solution (16),
        which describes an exponential decay to a steady oscillation, as Figure 4.2.2 shows. However,
        if the initial conditions are changed slightly, then c1 is likely to be nonzero, and the nature of
        the solution changes enormously. For example, if the first three initial conditions remain the
        same, but the value of y (0) is changed from −2 to −15/8, then the solution of the initial value
        problem becomes
                                                       95 −t
                                         y = 321 et + 32  e + 21 cos t − 1716
                                                                              sin t.                   (17)
        The coefficients in Eq. (17) differ only slightly from those in Eq. (16), but the exponentially
        growing term, even with the relatively small coefficient of 1/32, completely dominates the
        solution by the time t is larger than about 4 or 5. This is clearly seen in Figure 4.2.3, which
        shows the graphs of the two solutions (16) and (17).
                                           y
                                           8
                                           6
                                           4
                                           2
                                                           2        4        6            t
               FIGURE 4.2.3 The blue curve is the solution of the initial value problem (14), (15)
                 and is the same as the curve in Figure 4.2.2. The black curve is the solution of the
                 modified problem in which the last initial condition is changed to y (0) = −15/8.
        Repeated Roots. If the roots of the characteristic equation are not distinct—that is,
        if some of the roots are repeated—then the solution (5) is clearly not the general
        solution of Eq. (1). Recall that if r1 is a repeated root for the second order linear
        equation a0 y + a1 y + a2 y = 0, then two linearly independent solutions are er1 t and
        ter1 t . For an equation of order n, if a root of Z(r) = 0, say r = r1 , has multiplicity s
        (where s ≤ n), then
                                         er1 t , ter1 t , t 2 er1 t , . . . , t s−1 er1 t               (18)
        are corresponding solutions of Eq. (1). See Problem 41 for a proof of this statement,
        which is valid whether the repeated root is real or complex.
           Note that a complex root can be repeated only if the differential equation (1) is
        of order four or higher. If a complex root λ + iμ is repeated s times, the complex
        conjugate λ − iμ is also repeated s times. Corresponding to these 2s complex-valued
        solutions, we can find 2s real-valued solutions by noting that the real and imaginary
        parts of e(λ+iμ)t , te(λ+iμ)t , . . . , t s−1 e(λ+iμ)t are also linearly independent solutions:
                               eλt cos μt,          eλt sin μt, teλt cos μt, teλt sin μt,
                                        ...,        t s−1 eλt cos μt, t s−1 eλt sin μt.
        Hence the general solution of Eq. (1) can always be expressed as a linear combination
        of n real-valued solutions. Consider the following example.
        Find the general solution of
EXAMPLE                                                 y(4) + 2y + y = 0.                            (19)
   3       The characteristic equation is
                                           r 4 + 2r 2 + 1 = (r 2 + 1)(r 2 + 1) = 0.
        The roots are r = i, i, −i, −i, and the general solution of Eq. (19) is
                                      y = c1 cos t + c2 sin t + c3 t cos t + c4 t sin t.
            In determining the roots of the characteristic equation, it may be necessary to
         compute the cube roots, the fourth roots, or even higher roots of a (possibly com-
         plex) number. This can usually be done most conveniently by using Euler’s formula
         eit = cos t + i sin t and the algebraic laws given in Section 3.3. This is illustrated in the
         following example.
         Find the general solution of
 EXAMPLE                                                y(4) + y = 0.                                    (20)
    4       The characteristic equation is
                                                         r 4 + 1 = 0.
         To solve the equation, we must compute the fourth roots of −1. Now −1, thought of as a
         complex number, is −1 + 0i. It has magnitude 1 and polar angle π. Thus
                                                 −1 = cos π + i sin π = eiπ .
         Moreover, the angle is determined only up to a multiple of 2π. Thus
                                 −1 = cos(π + 2mπ) + i sin(π + 2mπ) = ei(π+2mπ) ,
         where m is zero or any positive or negative integer. Thus
                                                               π    mπ              π    mπ
                            (−1)1/4 = ei(π/4+mπ/2) = cos          +       + i sin      +    .
                                                               4      2              4    2
         The four fourth roots of −1 are obtained by setting m = 0, 1, 2, and 3; they are
                                     1+i             −1 + i        −1 − i        1−i
                                       √ ,            √ ,           √ ,           √ .
                                          2             2              2             2
         It is easy to verify that, for any other value of m, √        we obtain one of these four roots. For
         example, corresponding to m = 4, we obtain (1 + i)/ 2. The general solution of Eq. (20) is
                              √
                                                                     √
                                                                         
                                             t             t                       t          t
                       y = et/ 2 c1 cos √ + c2 sin √            + e−t/ 2 c3 cos √ + c4 sin √ .           (21)
                                               2             2                       2          2
            In conclusion, we note that the problem of finding all the roots of a polynomial
         equation may not be entirely straightforward, even with computer assistance. For
         instance, it may be difficult to determine whether two roots are equal or merely
         very close together. Recall that the form of the general solution is different in these
         two cases.
            If the constants a0 , a1 , . . . , an in Eq. (1) are complex numbers, the solution of Eq. (1)
         is still of the form (4). In this case, however, the roots of the characteristic equation
         are, in general, complex numbers, and it is no longer true that the complex conjugate
         of a root is also a root. The corresponding solutions are complex-valued.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, express the given complex number in the form
         R(cos θ + i sin θ) = Reiθ .
                                                                          √
           1. 1 + i                                              2. −1 + 3i
           3. −3                                                 4. −i
              √
           5. 3 − i                                              6. −1 − i
In each of Problems 7 through 10, follow the procedure illustrated in Example 4 to determine
the indicated roots of the given complex number.
 7. 11/3                                                       8. (1 − i)1/2
 9. 11/4                                                      10. [2(cos π/3 + i sin π/3)]1/2
In each of Problems 11 through 28, find the general solution of the given differential equation.
11. y − y − y + y = 0                                   12. y − 3y + 3y − y = 0
13. 2y − 4y − 2y + 4y = 0                               14. y(4) − 4y + 4y = 0
15. y(6) + y = 0                                              16. y(4) − 5y + 4y = 0
17. y(6) − 3y(4) + 3y − y = 0                               18. y(6) − y = 0
19. y(5) − 3y(4) + 3y − 3y + 2y = 0                     20. y(4) − 8y = 0
21. y(8) + 8y(4) + 16y = 0                                    22. y(4) + 2y + y = 0
23. y − 5y + 3y + y = 0                                 24. y + 5y + 6y + 2y = 0
25. 18y + 21y + 14y + 4y = 0                            26. y(4) − 7y + 6y + 30y − 36y = 0
27. 12y(4) + 31y + 75y + 37y + 5y = 0                   28. y(4) + 6y + 17y + 22y + 14y = 0
In each of Problems 29 through 36, find the solution of the given initial value problem, and
plot its graph. How does the solution behave as t → ∞?
29. y + y = 0;               y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1, y (0) = 2
      (4)
30. y + y = 0;                   y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0, y (0) = −1, y (0) = 0
      (4)               
31. y − 4y + 4y = 0;                      y(1) = −1, y (1) = 2, y (1) = 0, y (1) = 0
                  
32. y − y + y − y = 0;                     y(0) = 2, y (0) = −1, y (0) = −2
33. 2y(4) − y − 9y + 4y + 4y = 0;                 y(0) = −2, y (0) = 0, y (0) = −2, y (0) = 0
              
34. 4y + y + 5y = 0;                   y(0) = 2, y (0) = 1, y (0) = −1
                                                      
                    
35. 6y + 5y + y = 0;                     y(0) = −2, y (0) = 2, y (0) = 0
      (4)                         
36. y + 6y + 17y + 22y + 14y = 0;                          y(0) = 1, y (0) = −2, y (0) = 0,
      
     y (0) = 3
37. Show that the general solution of y(4) − y = 0 can be written as
                                       y = c1 cos t + c2 sin t + c3 cosh t + c4 sinh t.
     Determine the solution satisfying the initial conditions y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0, y (0) = 1,
     y (0) = 1. Why is it convenient to use the solutions cosh t and sinh t rather than et and
     e−t ?
38. Consider the equation y(4) − y = 0.
     (a) Use Abel’s formula [Problem 20(d) of Section 4.1] to find the Wronskian of a
     fundamental set of solutions of the given equation.
     (b) Determine the Wronskian of the solutions et , e−t , cos t, and sin t.
     (c) Determine the Wronskian of the solutions cosh t, sinh t, cos t, and sin t.
39. Consider the spring–mass system, shown in Figure 4.2.4, consisting of two unit masses
     suspended from springs with spring constants 3 and 2, respectively. Assume that there is
     no damping in the system.
     (a) Show that the displacements u1 and u2 of the masses from their respective equilibrium
     positions satisfy the equations
                                           u1 + 5u1 = 2u2 ,      u2 + 2u2 = 2u1 .                    (i)
    (b) Solve the first of Eqs. (i) for u2 and substitute into the second equation, thereby
    obtaining the following fourth order equation for u1 :
                                                         u(4)        
                                                           1 + 7u1 + 6u1 = 0.                                   (ii)
    Find the general solution of Eq. (ii).
    (c) Suppose that the initial conditions are
                                u1 (0) = 1,          u1 (0) = 0,         u2 (0) = 2,        u2 (0) = 0.      (iii)
    Use the first of Eqs. (i) and the initial conditions (iii) to obtain values for u1 (0) and u         1 (0).
    Then show that the solution of Eq. (ii) that satisfies the four initial conditions on u1 is
    u1 (t) = cos t. Show that the corresponding solution u2 is u2 (t) = 2 cos t.
    (d) Now suppose that the initial conditions are
                              u1 (0) = −2,             u1 (0) = 0,        u2 (0) = 1,         u2 (0) = 0.    (iv)
                                                                                                              √
    Proceed as in part        √ (c) to show that the corresponding solutions are u1 (t) = −2 cos 6 t
    and u2 (t) = cos 6 t.
    (e) Observe that the solutions obtained in parts (c) and (d) describe two distinct modes
    of vibration. In the first, the frequency of the motion is 1, and the two masses move in
    phase, both moving up or down together;              √          the second mass moves twice as far as the first.
    The second motion has frequency 6, and the masses move out of phase with each other,
    one moving down while the other is moving up, and vice versa. In this mode the first mass
    moves twice as far as the second. For other initial conditions, not proportional to either
    of Eqs. (iii) or (iv), the motion of the masses is a combination of these two modes.
                                                                        k1 = 3
                                                                 m1 = 1
                                                       u1
                                                                        k2 = 2
                                                                 m2 = 1
                                                       u2
                                 FIGURE 4.2.4 A two-spring, two-mass system.
40. In this problem we outline one way to show that if r1 , . . . , rn are all real and different, then
    er1 t , . . . , ern t are linearly independent on −∞ < t < ∞. To do this, we consider the linear
    relation
                                         c1 er1 t + · · · + cn ern t = 0,       −∞ < t < ∞                       (i)
    and show that all the constants are zero.
    (a) Multiply Eq. (i) by e−r1 t and differentiate with respect to t, thereby obtaining
                                     c2 (r2 − r1 )e(r2 −r1 )t + · · · + cn (rn − r1 )e(rn −r1 )t = 0.
                  (b) Multiply the result of part (a) by e−(r2 −r1 )t and differentiate with respect to t to obtain
                                c3 (r3 − r2 )(r3 − r1 )e(r3 −r2 )t + · · · + cn (rn − r2 )(rn − r1 )e(rn −r2 )t = 0.
                  (c) Continue the procedure from parts (a) and (b), eventually obtaining
                                                     cn (rn − rn−1 ) · · · (rn − r1 )e(rn −rn−1 )t = 0.
                  Hence cn = 0, and therefore,
                                                              c1 er1 t + · · · + cn−1 ern−1 t = 0.
                  (d) Repeat the preceding argument to show that cn−1 = 0. In a similar way it follows that
                  cn−2 = · · · = c1 = 0. Thus the functions er1 t , . . . , ern t are linearly independent.
              41. In this problem we indicate one way to show that if r = r1 is a root of multiplicity s
                  of the characteristic polynomial Z(r), then er1 t , ter1 t , . . . , t s−1 er1 t are solutions of Eq. (1).
                  This problem extends to nth order equations the method for second order equations given
                  in Problem 22 of Section 3.4. We start from Eq. (2) in the text
                                                                       L[ert ] = ert Z(r)                                (i)
                  and differentiate repeatedly with respect to r, setting r = r1 after each differentiation.
                  (a) Observe that if r1 is a root of multiplicity s, then Z(r) = (r − r1 )s q(r), where q(r) is
                  a polynomial of degree n − s and q(r1 )  = 0. Show that Z(r1 ), Z  (r1 ), . . . , Z (s−1) (r1 ) are all
                  zero, but Z (s) (r1 )  = 0.
                  (b) By differentiating Eq. (i) repeatedly with respect to r, show that
                                                                                       
                                                              ∂                   ∂ rt
                                                                 L[ert ] = L         e = L[tert ],
                                                             ∂r                   ∂r
                                                                           ..
                                                                            .
                                                          ∂s−1
                                                                 L[ert ] = L[t s−1 ert ].
                                                         ∂r s−1
                  (c) Show that er1 t , ter1 t , . . . , t s−1 er1 t are solutions of Eq. (1).
4.3 The Method of Undetermined Coefficients
              A particular solution Y of the nonhomogeneous nth order linear equation with
              constant coefficients
                                   L[y] = a0 y(n) + a1 y(n−1) + · · · + an−1 y + an y = g(t)                           (1)
              can be obtained by the method of undetermined coefficients, provided that g(t) is
              of an appropriate form. Although the method of undetermined coefficients is not
              as general as the method of variation of parameters described in the next section, it
              is usually much easier to use when it is applicable.
                 Just as for the second order linear equation, when the constant coefficient lin-
              ear differential operator L is applied to a polynomial A0 t m + A1 t m−1 + · · · + Am , an
        exponential function eαt , a sine function sin βt, or a cosine function cos βt, the result
        is a polynomial, an exponential function, or a linear combination of sine and cosine
        functions, respectively. Hence, if g(t) is a sum of polynomials, exponentials, sines, and
        cosines, or products of such functions, we can expect that it is possible to find Y(t)
        by choosing a suitable combination of polynomials, exponentials, and so forth, mul-
        tiplied by a number of undetermined constants. The constants are then determined
        by substituting the assumed expression into Eq. (1).
            The main difference in using this method for higher order equations stems from
        the fact that roots of the characteristic polynomial equation may have multiplicity
        greater than 2. Consequently, terms proposed for the nonhomogeneous part of the
        solution may need to be multiplied by higher powers of t to make them different from
        terms in the solution of the corresponding homogeneous equation. The following
        examples illustrate this. In these examples we have omitted numerous straightfor-
        ward algebraic steps, because our main goal is to show how to arrive at the correct
        form for the assumed solution.
        Find the general solution of
EXAMPLE                                             y − 3y + 3y − y = 4et .                      (2)
   1        The characteristic polynomial for the homogeneous equation corresponding to Eq. (2) is
                                                 r 3 − 3r 2 + 3r − 1 = (r − 1)3 ,
        so the general solution of the homogeneous equation is
                                                  yc (t) = c1 et + c2 tet + c3 t 2 et .                (3)
        To find a particular solution Y(t) of Eq. (2), we start by assuming that Y(t) = Aet . However,
        since et , tet , and t 2 et are all solutions of the homogeneous equation, we must multiply this
        initial choice by t 3 . Thus our final assumption is that Y(t) = At 3 et , where A is an undeter-
        mined coefficient. To find the correct value for A, we differentiate Y(t) three times, substitute
        for y and its derivatives in Eq. (2), and collect terms in the resulting equation. In this way we
        obtain
                                                            6Aet = 4et .
        Thus A = 23 and the particular solution is
                                                            Y(t) = 23 t 3 et .                         (4)
        The general solution of Eq. (2) is the sum of yc (t) from Eq. (3) and Y(t) from Eq. (4):
                                               y = c1 et + c2 tet + c3 t 2 et + 23 t 3 et .
        Find a particular solution of the equation
EXAMPLE
                                               y(4) + 2y + y = 3 sin t − 5 cos t.                    (5)
   2
            The general solution of the homogeneous equation was found in Example 3 of Section 4.2;
        it is
                                       yc (t) = c1 cos t + c2 sin t + c3 t cos t + c4 t sin t,         (6)
        corresponding to the roots r = i, i, −i, and −i of the characteristic equation. Our initial assump-
        tion for a particular solution is Y(t) = A sin t + B cos t, but we must multiply this choice by t 2 to
        make it different from all solutions of the homogeneous equation. Thus our final assumption is
                                             Y(t) = At 2 sin t + Bt 2 cos t.
        Next, we differentiate Y(t) four times, substitute into the differential equation (4), and collect
        terms, obtaining finally
                                       −8A sin t − 8B cos t = 3 sin t − 5 cos t.
        Thus A = − 38 , B = 58 , and the particular solution of Eq. (4) is
                                             Y(t) = − 38 t 2 sin t + 58 t 2 cos t.                         (7)
           If g(t) is a sum of several terms, it may be easier in practice to compute separately
        the particular solution corresponding to each term in g(t). As for the second order
        equation, the particular solution of the complete problem is the sum of the particular
        solutions of the individual component problems. This is illustrated in the following
        example.
        Find a particular solution of
EXAMPLE
                                             y − 4y = t + 3 cos t + e−2t .                             (8)
   3
           First we solve the homogeneous equation. The characteristic equation is r 3 − 4r = 0, and
        the roots are r = 0, ±2; hence
                                              yc (t) = c1 + c2 e2t + c3 e−2t .
        We can write a particular solution of Eq. (8) as the sum of particular solutions of the differential
        equations
                            y − 4y = t,       y − 4y = 3 cos t,         y − 4y = e−2t .
        Our initial choice for a particular solution Y1 (t) of the first equation is A0 t + A1 , but a constant
        is a solution of the homogeneous equation, so we multiply by t. Thus
                                                  Y1 (t) = t(A0 t + A1 ).
        For the second equation we choose
                                                Y2 (t) = B cos t + C sin t,
        and there is no need to modify this initial choice since sin t and cos t are not solutions of the
        homogeneous equation. Finally, for the third equation, since e−2t is a solution of the homo-
        geneous equation, we assume that
                                                       Y3 (t) = Ete−2t .
        The constants are determined by substituting into the individual differential equations; they
        are A0 = − 18 , A1 = 0, B = 0, C = − 35 , and E = 18 . Hence a particular solution of Eq. (8) is
                                            Y(t) = − 18 t 2 − 35 sin t + 18 te−2t .                        (9)
           You should keep in mind that the amount of algebra required to calculate
        the coefficients may be quite substantial for higher order equations, especially if the
        nonhomogeneous term is even moderately complicated. A computer algebra system
        can be extremely helpful in executing these algebraic calculations.
            The method of undetermined coefficients can be used whenever it is possible to
         guess the correct form for Y(t). However, this is usually impossible for differential
         equations not having constant coefficients, or for nonhomogeneous terms other than
         the type described previously. For more complicated problems we can use the method
         of variation of parameters, which is discussed in the next section.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 8, determine the general solution of the given differential
         equation.
           1. y − y − y + y = 2e−t + 3                           2. y(4) − y = 3t + cos t
                                  −t
           3. y + y + y + y = e + 4t                                   4. y − y = 2 sin t
           5. y(4) − 4y = t 2 + et                                   6. y(4) + 2y + y = 3 + cos 2t
               (6)      
           7. y + y = t                                                8. y(4) + y = sin 2t
         In each of Problems 9 through 12, find the solution of the given initial value problem. Then
         plot a graph of the solution.
           9. y + 4y = t;         y(0) = y (0) = 0, y (0) = 1
               (4)         
         10. y + 2y + y = 3t + 4;                 y(0) = y (0) = 0, y (0) = y (0) = 1
                              
         11. y − 3y + 2y = t + e ;         t
                                                  y(0) = 1, y (0) = − 14 , y (0) = − 23
         12. y(4) + 2y + y + 8y − 12y = 12 sin t − e−t ;                y(0) = 3, y (0) = 0,
              y (0) = −1, y (0) = 2
         In each of Problems 13 through 18, determine a suitable form for Y(t) if the method of
         undetermined coefficients is to be used. Do not evaluate the constants.
         13. y − 2y + y = t 3 + 2et                             14. y − y = te−t + 2 cos t
               (4)         
         15. y − 2y + y = e + sin t  t
                                                                      16. y(4) + 4y = sin 2t + tet + 4
               (4)              
         17. y − y − y + y = t + 4 + t sin t
                                           2
                                                                      18. y(4) + 2y + 2y = 3et + 2te−t + e−t sin t
         19. Consider the nonhomogeneous nth order linear differential equation
                                                 a0 y(n) + a1 y(n−1) + · · · + an y = g(t),                             (i)
              where a0 , . . . , an are constants. Verify that if g(t) is of the form
                                                          eαt (b0 t m + · · · + bm ),
              then the substitution y = eαt u(t) reduces Eq. (i) to the form
                                         k0 u(n) + k1 u(n−1) + · · · + kn u = b0 t m + · · · + bm ,                    (ii)
              where k0 , . . . , kn are constants. Determine k0 and kn in terms of the a’s and α. Thus the
              problem of determining a particular solution of the original equation is reduced to the sim-
              pler problem of determining a particular solution of an equation with constant coefficients
              and a polynomial for the nonhomogeneous term.
         Method of Annihilators. In Problems 20 through 22, we consider another way of arriving at
         the proper form of Y(t) for use in the method of undetermined coefficients. The procedure
         is based on the observation that exponential, polynomial, or sinusoidal terms (or sums and
         products of such terms) can be viewed as solutions of certain linear homogeneous differential
         equations with constant coefficients. It is convenient to use the symbol D for d/dt. Then, for
         example, e−t is a solution of (D + 1)y = 0; the differential operator D + 1 is said to annihilate,
         or to be an annihilator of, e−t . In the same way, D2 + 4 is an annihilator of sin 2t or cos 2t,
         (D − 3)2 = D2 − 6D + 9 is an annihilator of e3t or te3t , and so forth.
20. Show that linear differential operators with constant coefficients obey the commutative
     law. That is, show that
                                     (D − a)(D − b)f = (D − b)(D − a)f
     for any twice-differentiable function f and any constants a and b. The result extends at
     once to any finite number of factors.
21. Consider the problem of finding the form of a particular solution Y(t) of
                                       (D − 2)3 (D + 1)Y = 3e2t − te−t ,                                  (i)
     where the left side of the equation is written in a form corresponding to the factorization
     of the characteristic polynomial.
     (a) Show that D − 2 and (D + 1)2 , respectively, are annihilators of the terms on the right
     side of Eq. (i), and that the combined operator (D − 2)(D + 1)2 annihilates both terms on
     the right side of Eq. (i) simultaneously.
     (b) Apply the operator (D − 2)(D + 1)2 to Eq. (i) and use the result of Problem 20 to
     obtain
                                              (D − 2)4 (D + 1)3 Y = 0.                                   (ii)
    Thus Y is a solution of the homogeneous equation (ii). By solving Eq. (ii), show that
                    Y(t) = c1 e2t + c2 te2t + c3 t 2 e2t + c4 t 3 e2t + c5 e−t + c6 te−t + c7 t 2 e−t , (iii)
     where c1 , . . . , c7 are constants, as yet undetermined.
     (c) Observe that e2t , te2t , t 2 e2t , and e−t are solutions of the homogeneous equation cor-
     responding to Eq. (i); hence these terms are not useful in solving the nonhomogeneous
     equation. Therefore, choose c1 , c2 , c3 , and c5 to be zero in Eq. (iii), so that
                                       Y(t) = c4 t 3 e2t + c6 te−t + c7 t 2 e−t .                       (iv)
    This is the form of the particular solution Y of Eq. (i). The values of the coefficients c4 , c6 ,
     and c7 can be found by substituting from Eq. (iv) in the differential equation (i).
Summary. Suppose that
                                                L(D)y = g(t),                                            (v)
where L(D) is a linear differential operator with constant coefficients, and g(t) is a sum or
product of exponential, polynomial, or sinusoidal terms. To find the form of a particular
solution of Eq. (v), you can proceed as follows:
(a) Find a differential operator H(D) with constant coefficients that annihilates g(t)—that is,
an operator such that H(D)g(t) = 0.
(b) Apply H(D) to Eq. (v), obtaining
                                               H(D)L(D)y = 0,                                           (vi)
which is a homogeneous equation of higher order.
(c) Solve Eq. (vi).
(d) Eliminate from the solution found in step (c) the terms that also appear in the solution
of L(D)y = 0. The remaining terms constitute the correct form of a particular solution of
Eq. (v).
22. Use the method of annihilators to find the form of a particular solution Y(t) for each of
     the equations in Problems 13 through 18. Do not evaluate the coefficients.
4.4 The Method of Variation of Parameters
              The method of variation of parameters for determining a particular solution of the
              nonhomogeneous nth order linear differential equation
                                    L[y] = y(n) + p1 (t)y(n−1) + · · · + pn−1 (t)y + pn (t)y = g(t)              (1)
              is a direct extension of the method for the second order differential equation (see
              Section 3.6). As before, to use the method of variation of parameters, it is first nec-
              essary to solve the corresponding homogeneous differential equation. In general,
              this may be difficult unless the coefficients are constants. However, the method of
              variation of parameters is still more general than the method of undetermined coef-
              ficients in that it leads to an expression for the particular solution for any continuous
              function g, whereas the method of undetermined coefficients is restricted in practice
              to a limited class of functions g.
                 Suppose then that we know a fundamental set of solutions y1 , y2 , . . . , yn of the
              homogeneous equation. Then the general solution of the homogeneous equation is
                                               yc (t) = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) + · · · + cn yn (t).                (2)
              The method of variation of parameters for determining a particular solution of Eq. (1)
              rests on the possibility of determining n functions u1 , u2 , . . . , un such that Y(t) is of
              the form
                                          Y(t) = u1 (t)y1 (t) + u2 (t)y2 (t) + · · · + un (t)yn (t).              (3)
              Since we have n functions to determine, we will have to specify n conditions. One
              of these is clearly that Y satisfy Eq. (1). The other n − 1 conditions are chosen so
              as to make the calculations as simple as possible. Since we can hardly expect a sim-
              plification in determining Y if we must solve high order differential equations for
              u1 , . . . , un , it is natural to impose conditions to suppress the terms that lead to higher
              derivatives of u1 , . . . , un . From Eq. (3) we obtain
                                 Y  = (u1 y1 + u2 y2 + · · · + un yn ) + (u1 y1 + u2 y2 + · · · + un yn ), (4)
              where we have omitted the independent variable t on which each function in Eq. (4)
              depends. Thus the first condition that we impose is that
                                                      u1 y1 + u2 y2 + · · · + un yn = 0.                       (5)
                                                                      
              It follows that the expression (4) for Y reduces to
                                                     Y  = u1 y1 + u2 y2 + · · · + un yn .                     (6)
                 We continue this process by calculating the successive derivatives Y  , . . . , Y (n−1) .
              After each differentiation we set equal to zero the sum of terms involving derivatives
              of u1 , . . . , un . In this way we obtain n − 2 further conditions similar to Eq. (5); that is,
                                   u1 y(m)     (m)                 (m)
                                        1 + u2 y2 + · · · + un yn = 0,                 m = 1, 2, . . . , n − 2.   (7)
              As a result of these conditions, it follows that the expressions for Y  , . . . , Y (n−1)
              reduce to
                                Y (m) = u1 y(m)            (m)
                                              1 + u2 y2 + · · · + un yn ,
                                                                              (m)
                                                                                        m = 2, 3, . . . , n − 1,  (8)
   Finally, we need to impose the condition that Y must be a solution of Eq. (1). By
differentiating Y (n−1) from Eq. (8), we obtain
                Y (n) = (u1 y(n)                      (n)
                                1 + · · · + un yn ) + (u1 y1
                                                                   (n−1)
                                                                             + · · · + un y(n−1)
                                                                                            n     ).  (9)
To satisfy the differential equation we substitute for Y and its derivatives in Eq. (1)
from Eqs. (3), (6), (8), and (9). Then we group the terms involving each of the
functions y1 , . . . , yn and their derivatives. It then follows that most of the terms in the
equation drop out because each of y1 , . . . , yn is a solution of Eq. (1) and therefore
L[yi ] = 0, i = 1, 2, . . . , n. The remaining terms yield the relation
                            u1 y(n−1)
                                 1       + u2 y(n−1)
                                                  2       + · · · + un y(n−1)
                                                                          n      = g.                (10)
Equation (10), Eq. (5), and the n − 2 equations (7) provide n simultaneous linear
nonhomogeneous algebraic equations for u1 , u2 , . . . , un :
                                   y1 u1 + y2 u2 + · · · + yn un = 0,
                                   y1 u1 + y2 u2 + · · · + yn un = 0,
                                   y1 u1 + y2 u2 + · · · + yn un = 0,                       (11)
                                                                          ..
                                                                           .
                                    y(n−1)
                                       1     u1 + · · · + y(n−1)
                                                                n     un = g.
   The system (11) is a linear algebraic system for the unknown quantities u1 , . . . , un .
By solving this system and then integrating the resulting expressions, you can obtain
the coefficients u1 , . . . , un . A sufficient condition for the existence of a solution of the
system of equations (11) is that the determinant of coefficients is nonzero for each
value of t. However, the determinant of coefficients is precisely W(y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ), and
it is nowhere zero since y1 , . . . , yn is a fundamental set of solutions of the homoge-
neous equation. Hence it is possible to determine u1 , . . . , un . Using Cramer’s3 rule,
we can write the solution of the system of equations (11) in the form
                                          g(t)Wm (t)
                            um (t) =                     ,       m = 1, 2, . . . , n.               (12)
                                             W(t)
Here W(t) = W(y1 , y2 , . . . , yn )(t), and Wm is the determinant obtained from W by
replacing the mth column by the column (0, 0, . . . , 0, 1). With this notation a particular
solution of Eq. (1) is given by
                                            n               t
                                                                g(s)Wm (s)
                                Y(t) =            ym (t)                       ds,                   (13)
                                                             t0    W(s)
                                            m=1
where t0 is arbitrary. Although the procedure is straightforward, the algebraic com-
putations involved in determining Y(t) from Eq. (13) become more and more
3 Cramer’s rule is credited to the Swiss mathematician Gabriel Cramer (1704–1752), professor at the
Académie de Calvin in Geneva, who published it in a general form (but without proof) in 1750. For small
systems the result had been known earlier.
        complicated as n increases. In some cases the calculations may be simplified to some
        extent by using Abel’s identity (Problem 20 of Section 4.1),
                                                                                                         
                             W(t) = W(y1 , . . . , yn )(t) = c exp − p1 (t) dt .
        The constant c can be determined by evaluating W at some convenient point.
        Given that y1 (t) = et , y2 (t) = tet , and y3 (t) = e−t are solutions of the homogeneous equation
EXAMPLE corresponding to
   1                                              y − y − y + y = g(t),                                (14)
        determine a particular solution of Eq. (14) in terms of an integral.
          We use Eq. (13). First, we have
                                                                        t                               
                                                                       e            tet            e−t 
                                                                       
                                                       t −t                                             
                                 W(t) = W(e , te , e )(t) = et
                                                 t
                                                                                (t + 1)et          −e−t  .
                                                                                                        
                                                                       et      (t + 2)et           e−t 
        Factoring et from each of the first two columns and e−t from the third column, we obtain
                                                                                        
                                                            1            t            1
                                                            
                                                           t                            
                                              W(t) = e 1              t+1          −1 .
                                                                                        
                                                            1         t+2             1
        Then, by subtracting the first row from the second and third rows, we have
                                                                                     
                                                               1         t         1
                                                               
                                                              t                      
                                                 W(t) = e 0              1      −2 .
                                                                                     
                                                               0         2         0
        Finally, evaluating the latter determinant by minors associated with the first column, we find
        that
                                                          W(t) = 4et .
        Next,
                                                                                            
                                                        0            tet               e−t 
                                                        
                                                                                            
                                           W1 (t) = 0           (t + 1)et          −e−t  .
                                                                                            
                                                        1       (t + 2)et              e−t 
        Using minors associated with the first column, we obtain
                                                                             
                                                      tet               e−t 
                                                     
                                        W1 (t) =                              = −2t − 1.
                                                     (t + 1)et −e−t 
        In a similar way,
                                                t                    
                                               e        0       e−t                           
                                                                                et         e−t 
                                                                 −t            
                                   W2 (t) = et          0    −e  = −  t                        =2
                                                                               e      −e−t 
                                               et       1       e−t 
         and
                                                t                      
                                               e         tet       0  t                  
                                                                                      tet    
                                                                        e                  
                                     W3 (t) = et     (t + 1)e  t
                                                                    0 =  t                   = e2t .
                                                                        e        (t + 1)et 
                                               et    (t + 2)et     1
         Substituting these results in Eq. (13), we have
                                      t                                  t                       t
                                          g(s)(−1 − 2s)                      g(s)(2)           −t     g(s)e2s
                           Y(t) = et                s
                                                             ds +  te t
                                                                                   s
                                                                                       ds  + e                ds
                                      t0         4e                       t0    4e                 t0   4es
                                     
                                    1 t " t−s                                   #
                                  =        e [−1 + 2(t − s)] + e−(t−s) g(s) ds.                                      (15)
                                    4 t0
         Depending on the specific function g(t), it may or may not be possible to evaluate the integrals
         in Eq. (15) in terms of elementary functions.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, use the method of variation of parameters to determine the
         general solution of the given differential equation.
          1. y + y = tan t,         −π/2 < t < π/2                  2. y − y = t
                           
          3. y − 2y − y + 2y = e           4t
                                                                        4. y + y = sec t,         −π/2 < t < π/2
                                  −t
           5. y − y + y − y = e sin t                                   6. y(4) + 2y + y = sin t
         In each of Problems 7 and 8, find the general solution of the given differential equation. Leave
         your answer in terms of one or more integrals.
          7. y − y + y − y = sec t,           −π/2 < t < π/2
           8. y − y = csc t,       0<t<π
         In each of Problems 9 through 12, find the solution of the given initial value problem. Then
         plot a graph of the solution.
           9. y + y = sec t;        y(0) = 2, y (0) = 1, y (0) = −2
               (4)         
         10. y + 2y + y = sin t;               y(0) = 2, y (0) = 0, y (0) = −1, y (0) = 1
                         
         11. y − y + y − y = sec t;                 y(0) = 2, y (0) = −1, y (0) = 1
                   
         12. y − y = csc t;            y(π/2) = 2, y (π/2) = 1, y (π/2) = −1
         13. Given that x, x2 , and 1/x are solutions of the homogeneous equation corresponding to
                                            x3 y + x2 y − 2xy + 2y = 2x4 ,            x > 0,
              determine a particular solution.
         14. Find a formula involving integrals for a particular solution of the differential equation
                                                        y − y + y − y = g(t).
         15. Find a formula involving integrals for a particular solution of the differential equation
                                                              y(4) − y = g(t).
              Hint: The functions sin t, cos t, sinh t, and cosh t form a fundamental set of solutions of
              the homogeneous equation.
           16. Find a formula involving integrals for a particular solution of the differential equation
                                                     y − 3y + 3y − y = g(t).
               If g(t) = t −2 et , determine Y(t).
           17. Find a formula involving integrals for a particular solution of the differential equation
                                          x3 y − 3x2 y + 6xy − 6y = g(x),    x > 0.
               Hint: Verify that x, x2 , and x3 are solutions of the homogeneous equation.
REFERENCES Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
             Hall, 1961; New York: Dover, 1989).
           Coddington, E. A. and Carlson, R., Linear Ordinary Differential Equations (Philadelphia, PA: Society for
             Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1997).
 CHAPTER
     5
               Series Solutions of
               Second Order
               Linear Equations
               Finding the general solution of a linear differential equation depends on determin-
               ing a fundamental set of solutions of the homogeneous equation. So far,we have given
               a systematic procedure for constructing fundamental solutions only if the equation
               has constant coefficients. To deal with the much larger class of equations that have
               variable coefficients, it is necessary to extend our search for solutions beyond the
               familiar elementary functions of calculus. The principal tool that we need is the rep-
               resentation of a given function by a power series. The basic idea is similar to that in
               the method of undetermined coefficients: we assume that the solutions of a given dif-
               ferential equation have power series expansions, and then we attempt to determine
               the coefficients so as to satisfy the differential equation.
5.1 Review of Power Series
               In this chapter we discuss the use of power series to construct fundamental sets of
               solutions of second order linear differential equations whose coefficients are func-
               tions of the independent variable. We begin by summarizing very briefly the pertinent
               results about power series that we need. Readers who are familiar with power series
               may go on to Section 5.2. Those who need more details than are presented here
               should consult a book on calculus.
                                  ∞
               1. A power series      an (x − x0 )n is said to converge at a point x if
                                  n=0
                                                               m
                                                          lim      an (x − x0 )n
                                                         m→∞
                                                               n=0
                                                                                                 247
            exists for that x. The series certainly converges for x = x0 ; it may converge for all x, or it
            may converge for some values of x and not for others.
                           
                           ∞
        2. The series         an (x − x0 )n is said to converge absolutely at a point x if the series
                          n=0
                                                 ∞                    ∞
                                                    |an (x − x0 )n | =      |an ||x − x0 |n
                                                n=0                    n=0
            converges. It can be shown that if the series converges absolutely, then the series
            also converges; however, the converse is not necessarily true.
        3.  One of the most useful tests for the absolute convergence of a power series is the ratio
            test. If an  = 0, and if, for a fixed value of x,
                                                                                    
                                         an+1 (x − x0 )n+1                          
                                   lim                      = |x − x0 | lim  an+1  = |x − x0 |L,
                                  n→∞       an (x − x0 )n                n→∞  an 
            then the power series converges absolutely at that value of x if |x − x0 |L < 1 and diverges
            if |x − x0 |L > 1. If |x − x0 |L = 1, the test is inconclusive.
        For which values of x does the power series
EXAMPLE
                                                      ∞
   1                                                       (−1)n+1 n(x − 2)n
                                                      n=1
        converge?
           To test for convergence, we use the ratio test. We have
                                                                 
                                  (−1)n+2 (n + 1)(x − 2)n+1 
                            lim                                  = |x − 2| lim n + 1 = |x − 2|.
                           n→∞         (−1) n(x − 2)
                                              n+1           n                  n→∞     n
        According to statement 3, the series converges absolutely for |x − 2| < 1, or 1 < x < 3, and
        diverges for |x − 2| > 1. The values of x corresponding to |x − 2| = 1 are x = 1 and x = 3. The
        series diverges for each of these values of x since the nth term of the series does not approach
        zero as n → ∞.
                                          ∞
        4.  If the power series               an (x − x0 )n converges at x = x1 , it converges absolutely for
                                          n=0
            |x − x0 | < |x1 − x0 |; and if it diverges at x = x1 , it diverges for |x − x0 | > |x1 − x0 |.
        5.  For a typical power series, such as the one in Example 1, there is a positive number ρ, called
                                                            ∞
            the radius of convergence, such that                an (x − x0 )n converges absolutely for |x − x0 | < ρ
                                                            n=0
            and diverges for |x − x0 | > ρ. The interval |x − x0 | < ρ is called the interval of convergence;
            it is indicated by the hatched lines in Figure 5.1.1. The series may either converge or diverge
            when |x − x0 | = ρ. Many important power series converge for all values of x. In this case
            it is customary to say that ρ is infinite and the interval of convergence is the entire real
            line. It is also possible for a power series to converge only at x0 . For such a series we say
            that ρ = 0 and the series has no interval of convergence. When these exceptional cases are
            taken into account, every power series has a nonnegative radius of convergence ρ, and if
            ρ > 0, then there is a (finite or infinite) interval of convergence centered at x0 .
                                                             Series
                                     Series                                            Series
                                                          converges
                                    diverges                                         diverges
                                                          absolutely
                                                x0 – ρ          x0          x0 + ρ                  x
                                                         Series may
                                                     converge or diverge
                         FIGURE 5.1.1 The interval of convergence of a power series.
        Determine the radius of convergence of the power series
EXAMPLE
                                                        ∞
                                                              (x + 1)n
   2                                                             n2n
                                                                          .
                                                        n=1
           We apply the ratio test:
                                                           
                                   (x + 1)n+1       n2n  |x + 1|                  n        |x + 1|
                             lim                            =              lim          =           .
                            n→∞ (n + 1)2n+1 (x + 1)n                  2 n→∞ n + 1               2
        Thus the series converges absolutely for |x + 1| < 2, or −3 < x < 1, and diverges for
        |x + 1| > 2. The radius of convergence of the power series is ρ = 2. Finally, we check the
        endpoints of the interval of convergence. At x = 1 the series becomes the harmonic series
                                                             ∞
                                                                   1
                                                                     ,
                                                             n=1
                                                                  n
        which diverges. At x = −3 we have
                                               ∞
                                                    (−3 + 1)n          ∞
                                                                            (−1)n
                                                                  =                ,
                                               n=1
                                                        n2n            n=1
                                                                               n
        which converges but does not converge absolutely. The series is said to converge condition-
        ally at x = −3. To summarize, the given power series converges for −3 ≤ x < 1 and diverges
        otherwise. It converges absolutely for −3 < x < 1 and has a radius of convergence 2.
                             ∞                        ∞
           Suppose that          an (x − x0 )n and         bn (x − x0 )n converge to f (x) and g(x), respec-
                             n=0                       n=0
        tively, for |x − x0 | < ρ, ρ > 0.
        6. The two series can be added or subtracted termwise, and
                                                               ∞
                                            f (x) ± g(x) =         (an ± bn )(x − x0 )n ;
                                                               n=0
             the resulting series converges at least for |x − x0 | < ρ.
        7. The two series can be formally multiplied, and
                                                              ∞                     
                                          ∞                                              ∞
                          f (x)g(x) =          an (x − x0 )n           bn (x − x0 )n =          cn (x − x0 )n ,
                                          n=0                    n=0                       n=0
             where cn = a0 bn + a1 bn−1 + · · · + an b0 . The resulting series converges at least for
             |x − x0 | < ρ.
     Further, if g(x0 )  = 0, the series for f (x) can be formally divided by the series for g(x), and
                                                      f (x) 
                                                                   ∞
                                                             =         dn (x − x0 )n .
                                                      g(x)        n=0
     In most cases the coefficients dn can be most easily obtained by equating coefficients in
     the equivalent relation
                                                                                    ∞                  
                                    ∞                      ∞                        
                                        an (x − x0 ) =
                                                    n
                                                                 dn (x − x0 )    n
                                                                                          bn (x − x0 )n
                                    n=0                     n=0                       n=0
                                                               n                 
                                                          ∞     
                                                      =                dk bn−k (x − x0 )n .
                                                          n=0    k=0
     In the case of division, the radius of convergence of the resulting power series may be less
     than ρ.
8. The function f is continuous and has derivatives of all orders for |x − x0 | < ρ. Moreover,
     f  , f  , . . . can be computed by differentiating the series termwise; that is,
                              f  (x) = a1 + 2a2 (x − x0 ) + · · · + nan (x − x0 )n−1 + · · ·
                                         ∞
                                      =       nan (x − x0 )n−1 ,
                                         n=1
                               
                             f (x) = 2a2 + 6a3 (x − x0 ) + · · · + n(n − 1)an (x − x0 )n−2 + · · ·
                                         ∞
                                      =       n(n − 1)an (x − x0 )n−2 ,
                                         n=2
     and so forth, and each of the series converges absolutely for |x − x0 | < ρ.
9. The value of an is given by
                                                                     f (n) (x0 )
                                                             an =                .
                                                                         n!
     The series is called the Taylor1 series for the function f about x = x0 .
           
           ∞                          ∞
10. If           an (x − x0 )n =          bn (x − x0 )n for each x in some open interval with center x0 , then
          n=0                         n=0
                                                                            ∞
     an = bn for n = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . . In particular, if                      an (x − x0 )n = 0 for each such x, then
                                                                            n=0
     a0 = a1 = · · · = an = · · · = 0.
   A function f that has a Taylor series expansion about x = x0
                                                         ∞
                                                               f (n) (x0 )
                                               f (x) =                       (x − x0 )n ,
                                                         n=0
                                                                   n!
1 Brook Taylor (1685–1731), English mathematician, received his education at Cambridge University. His
book Methodus incrementorum directa et inversa, published in 1715, includes a general statement of the
expansion theorem that is named for him.This is a basic result in all branches of analysis,but its fundamental
importance was not recognized until 1772 (by Lagrange). Taylor was also the first to use integration by
parts, was one of the founders of the calculus of finite differences, and was the first to recognize the
existence of singular solutions of differential equations.
        with a radius of convergence ρ > 0, is said to be analytic at x = x0 . All of the familiar
        functions of calculus are analytic except perhaps at certain easily recognized points.
        For example, sin x and ex are analytic everywhere, 1/x is analytic except at x = 0, and
        tan x is analytic except at odd multiples of π/2. According to statements 6 and 7, if f
        and g are analytic at x0 , then f ± g, f · g, and f /g [provided that g(x0 )  = 0] are also
        analytic at x = x0 . In many respects the natural context for the use of power series
        is the complex plane. The methods and results of this chapter nearly always can be
        directly extended to differential equations in which the independent and dependent
        variables are complex-valued.
        Shift of Index of Summation. The index of summation in an infinite series is a dummy
        parameter just as the integration variable in a definite integral is a dummy variable.
        Thus it is immaterial which letter is used for the index of summation. For example,
                                                ∞              ∞
                                                     2n xn          2j xj
                                                            =             .
                                                       n!             j!
                                                n=0             j=0
           Just as we make changes of the variable of integration in a definite integral, we find
        it convenient to make changes of summation indices in calculating series solutions of
        differential equations. We illustrate by several examples how to shift the summation
        index.
               ∞
        Write      an xn as a series whose first term corresponds to n = 0 rather than n = 2.
               n=2
EXAMPLE
           Let m = n − 2; then n = m + 2, and n = 2 corresponds to m = 0. Hence
   3                                          ∞            ∞
                                                   an xn =       am+2 xm+2 .                          (1)
                                              n=2           m=0
        By writing out the first few terms of each of these series, you can verify that they contain
        precisely the same terms. Finally, in the series on the right side of Eq. (1), we can replace the
        dummy index m by n, obtaining
                                               ∞           ∞
                                                   an x n =      an+2 xn+2 .                          (2)
                                               n=2          n=0
        In effect, we have shifted the index upward by 2 and have compensated by starting to count
        at a level 2 lower than originally.
        Write the series
EXAMPLE                                   ∞
                                              (n + 2)(n + 1)an (x − x0 )n−2                           (3)
   4                                      n=2
        as a series whose generic term involves (x − x0 )n rather than (x − x0 )n−2 .
           Again, we shift the index by 2 so that n is replaced by n + 2 and start counting 2 lower. We
        obtain
                                          ∞
                                              (n + 4)(n + 3)an+2 (x − x0 )n .                         (4)
                                          n=0
        You can readily verify that the terms in the series (3) and (4) are exactly the same.
        Write the expression
EXAMPLE                                              ∞
                                                 x2      (r + n)an xr+n−1                               (5)
   5                                                 n=0
        as a series whose generic term involves xr+n .
           First, take the x2 inside the summation, obtaining
                                                   ∞
                                                       (r + n)an xr+n+1 .                               (6)
                                                   n=0
        Next, shift the index down by 1 and start counting 1 higher. Thus
                                   ∞                        ∞
                                       (r + n)an xr+n+1 =         (r + n − 1)an−1 xr+n .                (7)
                                   n=0                       n=1
        Again, you can easily verify that the two series in Eq. (7) are identical and that both are exactly
        the same as the expression (5).
        Assume that
EXAMPLE                                         ∞                 ∞
                                                     nan xn−1 =        an xn                            (8)
   6                                            n=1                n=0
        for all x, and determine what this implies about the coefficients an .
           We want to use statement 10 to equate corresponding coefficients in the two series. In order
        to do this, we must first rewrite Eq. (8) so that the series display the same power of x in their
        generic terms. For instance, in the series on the left side of Eq. (8), we can replace n by n + 1
        and start counting 1 lower. Thus Eq. (8) becomes
                                            ∞                        ∞
                                                 (n + 1)an+1 xn =         an x n .                      (9)
                                            n=0                       n=0
        According to statement 10, we conclude that
                                       (n + 1)an+1 = an ,         n = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .
        or
                                                    an
                                        an+1 =           ,     n = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . .                 (10)
                                                  n+1
        Hence, choosing successive values of n in Eq. (10), we have
                                                         a1    a0                  a2   a0
                                  a1 = a0 ,      a2 =       = ,           a3 =        = ,
                                                         2      2                  3    3!
        and so forth. In general,
                                                    a0
                                            an = ,           n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .                      (11)
                                                    n!
        Thus the relation (8) determines all the following coefficients in terms of a0 . Finally, using the
        coefficients given by Eq. (11), we obtain
                                             ∞               ∞
                                                                   xn
                                                  an xn = a0           = a0 ex ,
                                             n=0              n=0
                                                                   n!
        where we have followed the usual convention that 0! = 1.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 8, determine the radius of convergence of the given power
         series.
              ∞                                                       ∞ n
           1.     (x − 3)n                                         2.        n
                                                                               xn
              n=0                                                      n=0 2
              ∞ x2n                                                   ∞
          3.                                                       4.      2n xn
              n=0 n!                                                   n=0
              ∞ (2x + 1)n                                             ∞ (x − x )n
                                                                                   0
          5.                                                       6.
              n=1      n2                                              n=1       n
              ∞ (−1)n n2 (x + 2)n                                     ∞ n!xn
          7.                                                       8.
              n=1          3n                                          n=1 n
                                                                               n
         In each of Problems 9 through 16, determine the Taylor series about the point x0 for the given
         function. Also determine the radius of convergence of the series.
          9. sin x,        x0 = 0                                 10. ex ,       x0 = 0
         11. x,        x0 = 1                                     12. x2 ,       x0 = −1
                                                                          1
         13. ln x,        x0 = 1                                  14.          ,      x0 = 0
                                                                        1+x
                 1                                                        1
         15.         ,      x0 = 0                                16.          ,      x0 = 2
              1−x                                                       1−x
                                  ∞
         17. Given that y =           nxn , compute y and y and write out the first four terms of each series,
                                  n=0
              as well as the coefficient of xn in the general term.
                                   ∞
         18. Given that y =            an xn , compute y and y and write out the first four terms of each
                                   n=0
              series, as well as the coefficient of xn in the general term. Show that if y = y, then the
              coefficients a0 and a1 are arbitrary, and determine a2 and a3 in terms of a0 and a1 . Show
              that an+2 = an /(n + 2)(n + 1), n = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . .
         In each of Problems 19 and 20, verify the given equation.
              ∞                      
                                      ∞
         19.      an (x − 1)n+1 =         an−1 (x − 1)n
              n=0                    n=1
              ∞              ∞                      ∞
         20.      ak+1 xk +       ak xk+1 = a1 +         (ak+1 + ak−1 )xk
              k=0             k=0                     k=1
         In each of Problems 21 through 27, rewrite the given expression as a sum whose generic term
         involves xn .
              ∞                                                       ∞
         21.      n(n − 1)an xn−2                                 22.      an xn+2
              n=2                                                      n=0
                ∞                
                                  ∞                                               ∞
         23. x      nan xn−1 +        ak x k                      24. (1 − x2 )       n(n − 1)an xn−2
                n=1              k=0                                              n=2
               
               ∞                               ∞                      ∞                 ∞
         25.       m(m − 1)am xm−2 + x             kak xk−1       26.      nan xn−1 + x       an xn
              m=2                              k=1                     n=1                n=0
                ∞                          ∞
         27. x      n(n − 1)an xn−2 +           an xn
                n=2                        n=0
                28. Determine the an so that the equation
                                                       ∞                ∞
                                                            nan xn−1 + 2     an xn = 0
                                                       n=1               n=0
                                                                                         ∞
                     is satisfied. Try to identify the function represented by the series     an xn .
                                                                                         n=0
5.2 Series Solutions Near an Ordinary Point, Part I
                In Chapter 3 we described methods of solving second order linear differential equa-
                tions with constant coefficients. We now consider methods of solving second order
                linear equations when the coefficients are functions of the independent variable. In
                this chapter we will denote the independent variable by x. It is sufficient to consider
                the homogeneous equation
                                                      d2 y           dy
                                                P(x)      2
                                                            + Q(x)       + R(x)y = 0,                  (1)
                                                      dx             dx
                since the procedure for the corresponding nonhomogeneous equation is similar.
                    Many problems in mathematical physics lead to equations of the form (1) having
                polynomial coefficients; examples include the Bessel equation
                                                   x2 y + xy + (x2 − ν2 )y = 0,
                where ν is a constant, and the Legendre equation
                                              (1 − x2 )y − 2xy + α(α + 1)y = 0,
                where α is a constant. For this reason,as well as to simplify the algebraic computations,
                we primarily consider the case in which the functions P, Q, and R are polynomials.
                However, as we will see, the method of solution is also applicable when P, Q, and R
                are general analytic functions.
                    For the present, then, suppose that P, Q, and R are polynomials and that there is
                no factor (x − c) that is common to all three of them. If there is such a factor (x − c),
                then divide it out before proceeding. Suppose also that we wish to solve Eq. (1) in
                the neighborhood of a point x0 . The solution of Eq. (1) in an interval containing x0
                is closely associated with the behavior of P in that interval.
                    A point x0 such that P(x0 )  = 0 is called an ordinary point. Since P is continuous, it
                follows that there is an interval about x0 in which P(x) is never zero. In that interval
                we can divide Eq. (1) by P(x) to obtain
                                                     y + p(x)y + q(x)y = 0,                         (2)
                where p(x) = Q(x)/P(x) and q(x) = R(x)/P(x) are continuous functions. Hence,
                according to the existence and uniqueness Theorem 3.2.1, there exists in that inter-
                val a unique solution of Eq. (1) that also satisfies the initial conditions y(x0 ) = y0 ,
                y (x0 ) = y0 for arbitrary values of y0 and y0 . In this and the following section, we
                discuss the solution of Eq. (1) in the neighborhood of an ordinary point.
                    On the other hand, if P(x0 ) = 0, then x0 is called a singular point of Eq. (1). In
                this case at least one of Q(x0 ) and R(x0 ) is not zero. Consequently, at least one of
        the coefficients p and q in Eq. (2) becomes unbounded as x → x0 , and therefore
        Theorem 3.2.1 does not apply in this case. Sections 5.4 through 5.7 deal with finding
        solutions of Eq. (1) in the neighborhood of a singular point.
           We now take up the problem of solving Eq. (1) in the neighborhood of an ordinary
        point x0 . We look for solutions of the form
                                                                                   ∞
                    y = a0 + a1 (x − x0 ) + · · · + an (x − x0 )n + · · · =            an (x − x0 )n (3)
                                                                                   n=0
        and assume that the series converges in the interval |x − x0 | < ρ for some ρ > 0.
        While at first sight it may appear unattractive to seek a solution in the form of a
        power series, this is actually a convenient and useful form for a solution. Within their
        intervals of convergence, power series behave very much like polynomials and are
        easy to manipulate both analytically and numerically. Indeed, even if we can obtain
        a solution in terms of elementary functions, such as exponential or trigonometric
        functions, we are likely to need a power series or some equivalent expression if we
        want to evaluate them numerically or to plot their graphs.
           The most practical way to determine the coefficients an is to substitute the series
        (3) and its derivatives for y, y , and y in Eq. (1). The following examples illustrate this
        process. The operations, such as differentiation, that are involved in the procedure
        are justified so long as we stay within the interval of convergence. The differential
        equations in these examples are also of considerable importance in their own right.
        Find a series solution of the equation
EXAMPLE
                                           y + y = 0,      −∞ < x < ∞.                             (4)
   1
           As we know, sin x and cos x form a fundamental set of solutions of this equation, so
        series methods are not needed to solve it. However, this example illustrates the use of
        power series in a relatively simple case. For Eq. (4), P(x) = 1, Q(x) = 0, and R(x) = 1; hence
        every point is an ordinary point.
           We look for a solution in the form of a power series about x0 = 0
                                                                                 ∞
                                y = a0 + a1 x + a2 x2 + · · · + an xn + · · · =      an xn           (5)
                                                                                 n=0
        and assume that the series converges in some interval |x| < ρ. Differentiating Eq. (5) term by
        term, we obtain
                                                                              ∞
                               y = a1 + 2a2 x + · · · + nan xn−1 + · · · =       nan xn−1           (6)
                                                                              n=1
        and
                                                                         ∞
                          y = 2a2 + · · · + n(n − 1)an xn−2 + · · · =       n(n − 1)an xn−2 .      (7)
                                                                         n=2
        Substituting the series (5) and (7) for y and y in Eq. (4) gives
                                         ∞                      ∞
                                              n(n − 1)an xn−2 +      an xn = 0.
                                         n=2                     n=0
To combine the two series, we need to rewrite at least one of them so that both series display
the same generic term. Thus, in the first sum, we shift the index of summation by replacing n
by n + 2 and starting the sum at 0 rather than 2. We obtain
                               ∞                              ∞
                                    (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 xn +        an x n = 0
                               n=0                             n=0
or
                                 ∞
                                      [(n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 + an ] xn = 0.
                                 n=0
For this equation to be satisfied for all x, the coefficient of each power of x must be zero; hence
we conclude that
                        (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 + an = 0,            n = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . .               (8)
   Equation (8) is referred to as a recurrence relation. The successive coefficients can be
evaluated one by one by writing the recurrence relation first for n = 0, then for n = 1, and
so forth. In this example Eq. (8) relates each coefficient to the second one before it. Thus
the even-numbered coefficients (a0 , a2 , a4 , . . .) and the odd-numbered ones (a1 , a3 , a5 , . . .) are
determined separately. For the even-numbered coefficients we have
                    a0        a0                 a2         a0                    a4       a0
           a2 = −       =− ,            a4 = −        =+ ,           a6 = −             = − ,....
                   2·1        2!                4·3         4!                   6·5       6!
These results suggest that in general, if n = 2k, then
                                            (−1)k
                              an = a2k =          a0 ,      k = 1, 2, 3, . . . .                      (9)
                                            (2k)!
We can prove Eq. (9) by mathematical induction. First, observe that it is true for k = 1. Next,
assume that it is true for an arbitrary value of k and consider the case k + 1. We have
                                a2k                        (−1)k                      (−1)k+1
            a2k+2 = −                       =−                               a0 =              a0 .
                       (2k + 2)(2k + 1)          (2k + 2)(2k + 1)(2k)!               (2k + 2)!
Hence Eq. (9) is also true for k + 1, and consequently it is true for all positive integers k.
   Similarly, for the odd-numbered coefficients
                    a1        a1                 a3         a1                    a5       a1
           a3 = −       =− ,            a5 = −        =+ ,           a7 = −             = − ,...,
                   2·3        3!                5·4         5!                   7·6       7!
and in general, if n = 2k + 1, then2
                                             (−1)k
                           an = a2k+1 =               a1 ,      k = 1, 2, 3, . . . .                 (10)
                                           (2k + 1)!
Substituting these coefficients into Eq. (5), we have
2The result given in Eq. (10) and other similar formulas in this chapter can be proved by an induction
argument resembling the one just given for Eq. (9). We assume that the results are plausible and omit the
inductive argument hereafter.
                                           a0 2 a1 3 a0 4 a1 5
                       y = a0 + a1 x −        x − x + x + x
                                           2!       3!        4!      5!
                                       (−1)n a0 2n       (−1)n a1 2n+1
                            +··· +               x +                x     + ···
                                        (2n)!           (2n + 1)!
                                                                            
                                       x2     x4           (−1)n 2n
                         = a0 1 −         +      + ··· +           x + ···
                                       2!     4!            (2n)!
                                                                                   
                                          x3     x5              (−1)n 2n+1
                            + a1 x −          +     + ··· +              x     + ···
                                          3!     5!           (2n + 1)!
                                ∞
                                     (−1)n             ∞
                                                             (−1)n 2n+1
                         = a0                x2n + a1                 x     .                  (11)
                                n=0
                                     (2n)!             n=0
                                                           (2n + 1)!
   Now that we have formally obtained two series solutions of Eq. (4), we can test them for
convergence. Using the ratio test, we can show that each of the series in Eq. (11) converges
for all x, and this justifies retroactively all the steps used in obtaining the solutions. Indeed,
we recognize that the first series in Eq. (11) is exactly the Taylor series for cos x about x = 0
and that the second is the Taylor series for sin x about x = 0. Thus, as expected, we obtain the
solution y = a0 cos x + a1 sin x.
   Notice that no conditions are imposed on a0 and a1 ; hence they are arbitrary. From Eqs. (5)
and (6) we see that y and y evaluated at x = 0 are a0 and a1 , respectively. Since the initial
conditions y(0) and y (0) can be chosen arbitrarily, it follows that a0 and a1 should be arbitrary
until specific initial conditions are stated.
   Figures 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 show how the partial sums of the series in Eq. (11) approximate
cos x and sin x. As the number of terms increases, the interval over which the approximation is
satisfactory becomes longer, and for each x in this interval the accuracy of the approximation
improves. However, you should always remember that a truncated power series provides only
a local approximation of the solution in a neighborhood of the initial point x = 0; it cannot
adequately represent the solution for large |x|.
                      y
                                            n = 4 n = 8 n = 12          n = 16   n = 20
                      2
                      1
                                     2            4           6           8         10    x
                     –1
                                                                                y = cos x
                     –2
                                      n=2       n=6      n = 10 n = 14 n = 18
                FIGURE 5.2.1 Polynomial approximations to cos x. The value
                        of n is the degree of the approximating polynomial.
                        y
                                               n=5    n = 9 n = 13 n = 17       n = 21
                         2
                         1
                                       2         4          6          8          10    x
                       –1
                                                                               y = sin x
                       –2
                                          n=3     n=7     n = 11 n = 15 n = 19
                 FIGURE 5.2.2 Polynomial approximations to sin x. The value
                          of n is the degree of the approximating polynomial.
   In Example 1 we knew from the start that sin x and cos x form a fundamental set of
solutions of Eq. (4). However, if we had not known this and had simply solved Eq. (4)
using series methods, we would still have obtained the solution (11). In recognition
of the fact that the differential equation (4) often occurs in applications, we might
decide to give the two solutions of Eq. (11) special names, perhaps
                                ∞                              ∞
                                      (−1)n                           (−1)n 2n+1
                     C(x) =                   2n
                                             x ,      S(x) =                   x      .              (12)
                                       (2n)!                        (2n + 1)!
                                n=0                             n=0
Then we might ask what properties these functions have. For instance, can we be sure
that C(x) and S(x) form a fundamental set of solutions? It follows at once from the
series expansions that C(0) = 1 and S(0) = 0. By differentiating the series for C(x)
and S(x) term by term, we find that
                                   S (x) = C(x),       C  (x) = −S(x).                             (13)
Thus, at x = 0 we have S (0) = 1 and C  (0) = 0. Consequently, the Wronskian of C
and S at x = 0 is                                             
                                                        1 0
                                                              
                                         W(C, S)(0) =          = 1,                                (14)
                                                        0 1
so these functions do indeed form a fundamental set of solutions. By substituting −x
for x in each of Eqs. (12), we obtain C(−x) = C(x) and S(−x) = −S(x). Moreover,
by calculating with the infinite series,3 we can show that the functions C(x) and S(x)
have all the usual analytical and algebraic properties of the cosine and sine functions,
respectively.
3 Such an analysis is given in Section 24 of K. Knopp,Theory and Applications of Infinite Series (New York:
Hafner, 1951).
            Although you probably first saw the sine and cosine functions defined in a more
        elementary manner in terms of right triangles, it is interesting that these functions
        can be defined as solutions of a certain simple second order linear differential equa-
        tion. To be precise, the function sin x can be defined as the unique solution of the
        initial value problem y + y = 0, y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1; similarly, cos x can be defined
        as the unique solution of the initial value problem y + y = 0, y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0.
        Many other functions that are important in mathematical physics are also defined
        as solutions of certain initial value problems. For most of these functions there is no
        simpler or more elementary way to approach them.
        Find a series solution in powers of x of Airy’s4 equation
EXAMPLE
                                            y − xy = 0,        −∞ < x < ∞.                                  (15)
   2
            For this equation P(x) = 1, Q(x) = 0, and R(x) = −x; hence every point is an ordinary point.
        We assume that
                                                             ∞
                                                         y=      an x n                                       (16)
                                                             n=0
        and that the series converges in some interval |x| < ρ. The series for y is given by Eq. (7); as
        explained in the preceding example, we can rewrite it as
                                                     ∞
                                             y =       (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 xn .                              (17)
                                                     n=0
        Substituting the series (16) and (17) for y and y in Eq. (15), we obtain
                                 ∞                                ∞            ∞
                                      (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 xn = x         an xn =      an xn+1 .                (18)
                                 n=0                               n=0           n=0
        Next, we shift the index of summation in the series on the right side of Eq. (18) by replacing
        n by n − 1 and starting the summation at 1 rather than zero. Thus we have
                                               ∞                             ∞
                                    2 · 1a2 +      (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 xn =        an−1 xn .
                                               n=1                            n=1
        Again, for this equation to be satisfied for all x in some interval, the coefficients of like powers
        of x must be equal; hence a2 = 0, and we obtain the recurrence relation
                                 (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 = an−1            for   n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .              (19)
            Since an+2 is given in terms of an−1 ,the a’s are determined in steps of three.Thus a0 determines
        a3 , which in turn determines a6 , . . . ; a1 determines a4 , which in turn determines a7 , . . . ; and a2
        determines a5 , which in turn determines a8 , . . . . Since a2 = 0, we immediately conclude that
        a5 = a8 = a11 = · · · = 0.
        4 Sir George Biddell Airy (1801–1892), an English astronomer and mathematician, was director of the
        Greenwich Observatory from 1835 to 1881. He studied the equation named for him in an 1838 paper on
        optics. One reason why Airy’s equation is of interest is that for x negative the solutions are similar to
        trigonometric functions, and for x positive they are similar to hyperbolic functions. Can you explain why
        it is reasonable to expect such behavior?
    For the sequence a0 , a3 , a6 , a9 , . . . we set n = 1, 4, 7, 10, . . . in the recurrence relation:
                 a0                 a3               a0                      a6                a0
         a3 =        ,     a6 =            =                 ,     a9 =           =                        ,....
                2·3               5·6           2·3·5·6                     8·9      2·3·5·6·8·9
These results suggest the general formula
                                                        a0
                            a3n =                                         ,       n ≥ 4.
                                     2 · 3 · 5 · 6 · · · (3n − 1)(3n)
    For the sequence a1 , a4 , a7 , a10 , . . . , we set n = 2, 5, 8, 11, . . . in the recurrence relation:
               a1               a4                 a1                        a7                 a1
       a4 =        ,     a7 =           =                  ,     a10 =            =                          ,....
             3·4               6·7           3·4·6·7                      9 · 10      3 · 4 · 6 · 7 · 9 · 10
In general, we have
                                                         a1
                           a3n+1 =                                          ,      n ≥ 4.
                                        3 · 4 · 6 · 7 · · · (3n)(3n + 1)
Thus the general solution of Airy’s equation is
                                                                                                    
                             x3                x6                             x3n
              y = a0 1 +           +                    + ··· +                               + ···
                            2·3 2·3·5·6                          2 · 3 · · · (3n − 1)(3n)
                                                                                                       
                                x4                x7                            x3n+1
                    + a1 x +           +                   + ··· +                                + ··· .          (20)
                               3·4 3·4·6·7                          3 · 4 · · · (3n)(3n + 1)
    Having obtained these two series solutions, we can now investigate their convergence.
Because of the rapid growth of the denominators of the terms in the series (20), we might
expect these series to have a large radius of convergence. Indeed, it is easy to use the ratio test
to show that both of these series converge for all x; see Problem 20.
   Assuming for the moment that the series do converge for all x, let y1 and y2 denote the
functions defined by the expressions in the first and second sets of brackets, respectively,
in Eq. (20). Then, by choosing first a0 = 1, a1 = 0 and then a0 = 0, a1 = 1, it follows that y1
and y2 are individually solutions of Eq. (15). Notice that y1 satisfies the initial conditions
y1 (0) = 1, y1 (0) = 0 and that y2 satisfies the initial conditions y2 (0) = 0, y2 (0) = 1. Thus
W(y1 , y2 )(0) = 1  = 0, and consequently y1 and y2 are a fundamental set of solutions. Hence
the general solution of Airy’s equation is
                              y = a0 y1 (x) + a1 y2 (x),            −∞ < x < ∞.
    In Figures 5.2.3 and 5.2.4, respectively, we show the graphs of the solutions y1 and y2 of
Airy’s equation, as well as graphs of several partial sums of the two series in Eq. (20). Again,
the partial sums provide local approximations to the solutions in a neighborhood of the origin.
Although the quality of the approximation improves as the number of terms increases, no
polynomial can adequately represent y1 and y2 for large |x|. A practical way to estimate the
interval in which a given partial sum is reasonably accurate is to compare the graphs of that
partial sum and the next one, obtained by including one more term. As soon as the graphs
begin to separate noticeably, we can be confident that the original partial sum is no longer
accurate. For example, in Figure 5.2.3 the graphs for n = 24 and n = 27 begin to separate
at about x = −9/2. Thus, beyond this point, the partial sum of degree 24 is worthless as an
approximation to the solution.
                                                                            y
                                                                            2            n=3
                            n = 48      36     24      12                       n≥6
                                     42    30       18        6
                      y = y1(x)
                  –10           –8           –6          –4             –2               2    x
                                      39      27    15
                              n = 45      33     21         9   3          –2
            FIGURE 5.2.3 Polynomial approximations to the solution y1 (x) of Airy’s equation.
                        The value of n is the degree of the approximating polynomial.
                                                                            y
                                                                                n≥4
                            n = 46       34     22        10                2
                                     40      28     16          4
                    y = y2(x)
                      –10         –8         –6           –4           –2                2    x
                            n = 49     37      25     13
                                    43    31      19         7             –2
            FIGURE 5.2.4 Polynomial approximations to the solution y2 (x) of Airy’s equation.
                        The value of n is the degree of the approximating polynomial.
           Observe that both y1 and y2 are monotone for x > 0 and oscillatory for x < 0. You can
        also see from the figures that the oscillations are not uniform but, rather, decay in amplitude
        and increase in frequency as the distance from the origin increases. In contrast to Example 1,
        the solutions y1 and y2 of Airy’s equation are not elementary functions that you have already
        encountered in calculus. However, because of their importance in some physical applications,
        these functions have been extensively studied, and their properties are well known to applied
        mathematicians and scientists.
        Find a solution of Airy’s equation in powers of x − 1.
EXAMPLE    The point x = 1 is an ordinary point of Eq. (15), and thus we look for a solution of the form
   3                                                 ∞
                                                y=       an (x − 1)n ,
                                                     n=0
where we assume that the series converges in some interval |x − 1| < ρ. Then
                                ∞                      ∞
                          y =      nan (x − 1)n−1 =        (n + 1)an+1 (x − 1)n ,
                                n=1                     n=0
and
                        ∞                              ∞
                 y =      n(n − 1)an (x − 1)n−2 =         (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 (x − 1)n .
                       n=2                              n=0
Substituting for y and y in Eq. (12), we obtain
                          ∞                                      ∞
                              (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 (x − 1)n = x           an (x − 1)n .                  (21)
                          n=0                                     n=0
Now to equate the coefficients of like powers of (x − 1), we must express x, the coefficient of y
in Eq. (15), in powers of x − 1; that is, we write x = 1 + (x − 1). Note that this is precisely the
Taylor series for x about x = 1. Then Eq. (21) takes the form
               ∞                                                      ∞
                   (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 (x − 1)n = [1 + (x − 1)]              an (x − 1)n
               n=0                                                     n=0
                                                       ∞                   ∞
                                                   =       an (x − 1)n +         an (x − 1)n+1 .
                                                       n=0                  n=0
Shifting the index of summation in the second series on the right gives
               ∞                                      ∞                   ∞
                   (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 (x − 1)n =           an (x − 1)n +         an−1 (x − 1)n .
               n=0                                     n=0                  n=1
   Equating coefficients of like powers of x − 1, we obtain
                                                 2a2 = a0 ,
                                           (3 · 2)a3 = a1 + a0 ,
                                           (4 · 3)a4 = a2 + a1 ,
                                           (5 · 4)a5 = a3 + a2 ,
                                                     ..
                                                      .
The general recurrence relation is
                           (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 = an + an−1            for     n ≥ 1.                    (22)
Solving for the first few coefficients an in terms of a0 and a1 , we find that
       a0             a1     a0              a2     a1      a0    a1                  a3    a2    a0   a1
 a2 = ,         a3 =      + ,         a4 =       +      =       + ,           a5 =        +     =    +    .
       2               6      6              12 12          24 12                    20 20        30 120
Hence
                                                                                           
                                 (x − 1)2     (x − 1)3      (x − 1)4      (x − 1)5
                 y = a0 1 +                +             +             +              + ···
                                    2             6            24             30
                                                                                        
                                          (x − 1)3      (x − 1)4      (x − 1)5
                       + a1 (x − 1) +               +             +               + ··· .              (23)
                                              6            12            120
   In general, when the recurrence relation has more than two terms, as in Eq. (22), the deter-
mination of a formula for an in terms a0 and a1 will be fairly complicated, if not impossible. In
this example such a formula is not readily apparent. Lacking such a formula, we cannot test the
two series in Eq. (23) for convergence by direct methods such as the ratio test. However, we
         shall see in Section 5.3 that even without knowing the formula for an , it is possible to establish
         that the two series in Eq. (23) converge for all x. Further, they define functions y3 and y4 that
         are a fundamental set of solutions of the Airy equation (15). Thus
                                                 y = a0 y3 (x) + a1 y4 (x)
         is the general solution of Airy’s equation for −∞ < x < ∞.
             It is worth emphasizing, as we saw in Example 3, that if we look for a solution
                                          ∞
         of Eq. (1) of the form y =           an (x − x0 )n , then the coefficients P(x), Q(x), and R(x)
                                          n=0
         in Eq. (1) must also be expressed in powers of x − x0 . Alternatively, we can make
         the change of variable x − x0 = t, obtaining a new differential equation for y as a
                                                                                                      ∞
         function of t, and then look for solutions of this new equation of the form                      an t n .
                                                                                                      n=0
         When we have finished the calculations, we replace t by x − x0 (see Problem 19).
             In Examples 2 and 3 we have found two sets of solutions of Airy’s equation. The
         functions y1 and y2 defined by the series in Eq. (20) are a fundamental set of solutions
         of Eq. (15) for all x, and this is also true for the functions y3 and y4 defined by the series
         in Eq. (23). According to the general theory of second order linear equations, each
         of the first two functions can be expressed as a linear combination of the latter two
         functions, and vice versa—a result that is certainly not obvious from an examination
         of the series alone.
             Finally, we emphasize that it is not particularly important if, as in Example 3, we are
         unable to determine the general coefficient an in terms of a0 and a1 . What is essential
         is that we can determine as many coefficients as we want. Thus we can find as many
         terms in the two series solutions as we want, even if we cannot determine the general
         term. While the task of calculating several coefficients in a power series solution is
         not difficult, it can be tedious. A symbolic manipulation package can be very helpful
         here; some are able to find a specified number of terms in a power series solution in
         response to a single command. With a suitable graphics package we can also produce
         plots such as those shown in the figures in this section.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 14:
         (a) Seek power series solutions of the given differential equation about the given point x0 ;
         find the recurrence relation.
         (b) Find the first four terms in each of two solutions y1 and y2 (unless the series terminates
         sooner).
         (c) By evaluating the Wronskian W(y1 , y2 )(x0 ), show that y1 and y2 form a fundamental set
         of solutions.
         (d) If possible, find the general term in each solution.
           1. y − y = 0,      x0 = 0                         2. y − xy − y = 0,     x0 = 0
           3. y − xy − y = 0,      x0 = 1                   4. y + k2 x2 y = 0,    x0 = 0,   k a constant
                                                                                
           5. (1 − x)y + y = 0,        x0 = 0                  6. (2 + x )y − xy + 4y = 0,
                                                                         2
                                                                                                   x0 = 0
           7. y + xy + 2y = 0,      x0 = 0                  8. xy + y + xy = 0,      x0 = 1
           9. (1 + x2 )y − 4xy + 6y = 0,      x0 = 0      10. (4 − x2 )y + 2y = 0,      x0 = 0
11. (3 − x2 )y − 3xy − y = 0,         x0 = 0
                   
12. (1 − x)y + xy − y = 0,             x0 = 0
13. 2y + xy + 3y = 0,         x0 = 0
14. 2y + (x + 1)y + 3y = 0,          x0 = 2
In each of Problems 15 through 18:
(a) Find the first five nonzero terms in the solution of the given initial value problem.
(b) Plot the four-term and the five-term approximations to the solution on the same axes.
(c) From the plot in part (b) estimate the interval in which the four-term approximation is
reasonably accurate.
15. y − xy − y = 0,        y(0) = 2, y (0) = 1;         see Problem 2
            2        
16. (2 + x )y − xy + 4y = 0,             y(0) = −1, y (0) = 3;         see Problem 6
17. y + xy + 2y = 0,         y(0) = 4, y (0) = −1;         see Problem 7
18. (1 − x)y + xy − y = 0,          y(0) = −3, y (0) = 2;        see Problem 12
19. (a) By making the change of variable x − 1 = t and assuming that y has a Taylor series in
     powers of t, find two series solutions of
                                       y + (x − 1)2 y + (x2 − 1)y = 0
     in powers of x − 1.
     (b) Show that you obtain the same result by assuming that y has a Taylor series in powers
     of x − 1 and also expressing the coefficient x2 − 1 in powers of x − 1.
20. Show directly, using the ratio test, that the two series solutions of Airy’s equation about
     x = 0 converge for all x; see Eq. (20) of the text.
21. The Hermite Equation. The equation
                                  y − 2xy + λy = 0,        −∞ < x < ∞,
     where λ is a constant, is known as the Hermite5 equation. It is an important equation in
     mathematical physics.
     (a) Find the first four terms in each of two solutions about x = 0 and show that they form
     a fundamental set of solutions.
     (b) Observe that if λ is a nonnegative even integer, then one or the other of the series
     solutions terminates and becomes a polynomial. Find the polynomial solutions for λ = 0,
     2, 4, 6, 8, and 10. Note that each polynomial is determined only up to a multiplicative
     constant.
     (c) The Hermite polynomial Hn (x) is defined as the polynomial solution of the Hermite
     equation with λ = 2n for which the coefficient of xn is 2n . Find H0 (x), . . . , H5 (x).
                                                   
22. Consider the initial value problem y = 1 − y2 , y(0) = 0.
     (a) Show that y = sin x is the solution of this initial value problem.
     (b) Look for a solution of the initial value problem in the form of a power series about
     x = 0. Find the coefficients up to the term in x3 in this series.
5 Charles Hermite (1822–1901) was an influential French analyst and algebraist. An inspiring teacher, he
was professor at the École Polytechnique and the Sorbonne. He introduced the Hermite functions in 1864
and showed in 1873 that e is a transcendental number (that is, e is not a root of any polynomial equation
with rational coefficients). His name is also associated with Hermitian matrices (see Section 7.3), some of
whose properties he discovered.
                In each of Problems 23 through 28, plot several partial sums in a series solution of the given
                initial value problem about x = 0, thereby obtaining graphs analogous to those in Figures 5.2.1
                through 5.2.4.
                23. y − xy − y = 0,         y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0;         see Problem 2
                            2                                       
                24. (2 + x )y − xy + 4y = 0,               y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0;        see Problem 6
                25. y + xy + 2y = 0,         y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1;         see Problem 7
                26. (4 − x2 )y + 2y = 0,          y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1;       see Problem 10
                      
                27. y + x y = 0,
                            2
                                          y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0;          see Problem 4
                28. (1 − x)y + xy − 2y = 0,            y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1
5.3 Series Solutions Near an Ordinary Point, Part II
                In the preceding section we considered the problem of finding solutions of
                                                     P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0,                           (1)
                where P, Q, and R are polynomials, in the neighborhood of an ordinary point x0 .
                Assuming that Eq. (1) does have a solution y = φ(x) and that φ has a Taylor series
                                                                    ∞
                                                        y = φ(x) =       an (x − x0 )n                       (2)
                                                                    n=0
                that converges for |x − x0 | < ρ, where ρ > 0, we found that the an can be determined
                by directly substituting the series (2) for y in Eq. (1).
                   Let us now consider how we might justify the statement that if x0 is an ordinary
                point of Eq. (1), then there exist solutions of the form (2). We also consider the
                question of the radius of convergence of such a series. In doing this, we are led to a
                generalization of the definition of an ordinary point.
                   Suppose, then, that there is a solution of Eq. (1) of the form (2). By differentiating
                Eq. (2) m times and setting x equal to x0 , we obtain
                                                             m!am = φ(m) (x0 ).
                Hence, to compute an in the series (2), we must show that we can determine φ(n) (x0 )
                for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . from the differential equation (1).
                   Suppose that y = φ(x) is a solution of Eq. (1) satisfying the initial conditions
                y(x0 ) = y0 , y (x0 ) = y0 . Then a0 = y0 and a1 = y0 . If we are solely interested in finding
                a solution of Eq. (1) without specifying any initial conditions, then a0 and a1 remain
                arbitrary. To determine φ(n) (x0 ) and the corresponding an for n = 2, 3, . . . , we turn to
                Eq. (1). Since φ is a solution of Eq. (1), we have
                                              P(x)φ (x) + Q(x)φ (x) + R(x)φ(x) = 0.
                For the interval about x0 for which P is nonzero, we can write this equation in the form
                                                    φ (x) = −p(x)φ (x) − q(x)φ(x),                        (3)
                where p(x) = Q(x)/P(x) and q(x) = R(x)/P(x). Setting x equal to x0 in Eq. (3) gives
                                                φ (x0 ) = −p(x0 )φ (x0 ) − q(x0 )φ(x0 ).
              Hence a2 is given by
                                          2!a2 = φ (x0 ) = −p(x0 )a1 − q(x0 )a0 .                       (4)
              To determine a3 , we differentiate Eq. (3) and then set x equal to x0 , obtaining
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  3!a3 = φ (x0 ) = −[pφ + (p + q)φ + q φ]
                                                                                      x=x0
                                       = −2!p(x0 )a2 − [p (x0 ) + q(x0 )]a1 − q (x0 )a0 .               (5)
              Substituting for a2 from Eq. (4) gives a3 in terms of a1 and a0 . Since P, Q, and R are
              polynomials and P(x0 )  = 0, all the derivatives of p and q exist at x0 . Hence, we can
              continue to differentiate Eq. (3) indefinitely, determining after each differentiation
              the successive coefficients a4 , a5 , . . . by setting x equal to x0 .
                 Notice that the important property that we used in determining the an was that
              we could compute infinitely many derivatives of the functions p and q. It might seem
              reasonable to relax our assumption that the functions p and q are ratios of polyno-
              mials and simply require that they be infinitely differentiable in the neighborhood of
              x0 . Unfortunately, this condition is too weak to ensure that we can prove the conver-
              gence of the resulting series expansion for y = φ(x). What is needed is to assume that
              the functions p and q are analytic at x0 ; that is, they have Taylor series expansions that
              converge to them in some interval about the point x0 :
                                                                                    ∞
                         p(x) = p0 + p1 (x − x0 ) + · · · + pn (x − x0 ) + · · · =
                                                                        n
                                                                                         pn (x − x0 )n ,  (6)
                                                                                    n=0
                                                                                    ∞
                         q(x) = q0 + q1 (x − x0 ) + · · · + qn (x − x0 ) + · · · =
                                                                        n
                                                                                         qn (x − x0 )n .  (7)
                                                                                    n=0
              With this idea in mind, we can generalize the definitions of an ordinary point and a
              singular point of Eq. (1) as follows: if the functions p = Q/P and q = R/P are analytic
              at x0 , then the point x0 is said to be an ordinary point of the differential equation (1);
              otherwise, it is a singular point.
                 Now let us turn to the question of the interval of convergence of the series solution.
              One possibility is actually to compute the series solution for each problem and then
              to apply one of the tests for convergence of an infinite series to determine its radius
              of convergence. Unfortunately, these tests require us to obtain an expression for the
              general coefficient an as a function of n, and this task is often quite difficult, if not
              impossible; recall Example 3 in Section 5.2. However, the question can be answered
              at once for a wide class of problems by the following theorem.
Theorem 5.3.1 If x0 is an ordinary point of the differential equation (1)
                                             P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0,
              that is, if p = Q/P and q = R/P are analytic at x0 , then the general solution of
              Eq. (1) is
                                            ∞
                                      y=        an (x − x0 )n = a0 y1 (x) + a1 y2 (x),                   (8)
                                            n=0
        where a0 and a1 are arbitrary, and y1 and y2 are two power series solutions that are
        analytic at x0 . The solutions y1 and y2 form a fundamental set of solutions. Further,
        the radius of convergence for each of the series solutions y1 and y2 is at least as
        large as the minimum of the radii of convergence of the series for p and q.
           To see that y1 and y2 are a fundamental set of solutions, note that they have the
        form y1 (x) = 1 + b2 (x − x0 )2 + · · · and y2 (x) = (x − x0 ) + c2 (x − x0 )2 + · · ·, where
        b2 + c2 = a2 . Hence y1 satisfies the initial conditions y1 (x0 ) = 1, y1 (x0 ) = 0, and y2
        satisfies the initial conditions y2 (x0 ) = 0, y2 (x0 ) = 1. Thus W(y1 , y2 )(x0 ) = 1.
           Also note that although calculating the coefficients by successively differenti-
        ating the differential equation is excellent in theory, it is usually not a practical
        computational procedure. Rather, you should substitute the series (2) for y in the dif-
        ferential equation (1) and determine the coefficients so that the differential equation
        is satisfied, as in the examples in the preceding section.
           We will not prove this theorem, which in a slightly more general form was estab-
        lished by Fuchs.6 What is important for our purposes is that there is a series solution
        of the form (2) and that the radius of convergence of the series solution cannot be
        less than the smaller of the radii of convergence of the series for p and q; hence we
        need only determine these.
           This can be done in either of two ways. Again, one possibility is simply to compute
        the power series for p and q and then to determine the radii of convergence by
        using one of the convergence tests for infinite series. However, there is an easier
        way when P, Q, and R are polynomials. It is shown in the theory of functions of a
        complex variable that the ratio of two polynomials, say, Q/P, has a convergent power
        series expansion about a point x = x0 if P(x0 )  = 0. Further, if we assume that any
        factors common to Q and P have been canceled, then the radius of convergence of
        the power series for Q/P about the point x0 is precisely the distance from x0 to the
        nearest zero of P. In determining this distance, we must remember that P(x) = 0 may
        have complex roots, and these must also be considered.
        What is the radius of convergence of the Taylor series for (1 + x2 )−1 about x = 0?
EXAMPLE    One way to proceed is to find the Taylor series in question, namely,
   1                                  1
                                           = 1 − x2 + x4 − x6 + · · · + (−1)n x2n + · · · .
                                  1 + x2
        Then it can be verified by the ratio test that ρ = 1. Another approach is to note that the zeros of
        1 + x2 are x = ±i. Since the distance in the complex plane from 0 to i or to −i is 1, the radius
        of convergence of the power series about x = 0 is 1.
        6 Lazarus Immanuel Fuchs (1833–1902), a German mathematician, was a student and later a professor at
        the University of Berlin. He proved the result of Theorem 5.3.1 in 1866. His most important research was
        on singular points of linear differential equations. He recognized the significance of regular singular points
        (Section 5.4), and equations whose only singularities, including the point at infinity, are regular singular
        points are known as Fuchsian equations.
        What is the radius of convergence of the Taylor series for (x2 − 2x + 2)−1 about x = 0? about
EXAMPLE x = 1?
   2       First notice that
                                                      x2 − 2x + 2 = 0
        has solutions x = 1 ± i. The distance in the complex plane from x = 0 to either x = 1 + i or
                       √                                                                          
                                                                                                  ∞
        x = 1 − i is 2; hence the radius of convergence of the Taylor series expansion                an xn about
                  √                                                                              n=0
        x = 0 is 2.
           The distance in the complex plane from x = 1 to either x = 1 + i or x = 1 − i is 1; hence the
                                                                       
                                                                       ∞
        radius of convergence of the Taylor series expansion              bn (x − 1)n about x = 1 is 1.
                                                                      n=0
           According to Theorem 5.3.1, the series solutions of the Airy equation in Examples
        2 and 3 of the preceding section converge for all values of x and x − 1, respectively,
        since in each problem P(x) = 1 and hence is never zero.
           A series solution may converge for a wider range of x than indicated by Theorem
        5.3.1, so the theorem actually gives only a lower bound on the radius of convergence
        of the series solution. This is illustrated by the Legendre polynomial solution of the
        Legendre equation given in the next example.
        Determine a lower bound for the radius of convergence of series solutions about x = 0 for the
EXAMPLE Legendre equation
   3                                       (1 − x2 )y − 2xy + α(α + 1)y = 0,
        where α is a constant.
           Note that P(x) = 1 − x2 , Q(x) = −2x, and R(x) = α(α + 1) are polynomials, and that the
        zeros of P, namely, x = ±1, are a distance 1 from x = 0. Hence a series solution of the form
        ∞
            an xn converges at least for |x| < 1, and possibly for larger values of x. Indeed, it can be shown
        n=0
        that if α is a positive integer, one of the series solutions terminates after a finite number of terms
        and hence converges not just for |x| < 1 but for all x. For example, if α = 1, the polynomial
        solution is y = x. See Problems 22 through 29 at the end of this section for a further discussion
        of the Legendre equation.
        Determine a lower bound for the radius of convergence of series solutions of the differential
EXAMPLE equation
   4                                          (1 + x2 )y + 2xy + 4x2 y = 0                                 (9)
        about the point x = 0; about the point x = − 21 .
           Again P, Q, and R are polynomials, and P has zeros at x = ±i. The distance in the complex
                                                                             √
        plane from 0 to ±i is 1, and from − 21 to ±i is 1 + 41 = 5/2. Hence in the first case the
                ∞                                                                               ∞           n
        series      an xn converges at least for |x| < 1, and in the second case the series          bn x + 21
                n=0                           √                                                  n=0
        converges at least for |x + 21 | < 5/2.
           An interesting observation that we can make about Eq. (9) follows from Theorems 3.2.1
        and 5.3.1. Suppose that initial conditions y(0) = y0 and y (0) = y0 are given. Since 1 + x2  = 0
        for all x, we know from Theorem 3.2.1 that there exists a unique solution of the initial value
        problem on −∞ < x < ∞. On the other hand,Theorem 5.3.1 only guarantees a series solution
                       ∞
        of the form        an xn (with a0 = y0 , a1 = y0 ) for −1 < x < 1. The unique solution on the interval
                       n=0
        −∞ < x < ∞ may not have a power series about x = 0 that converges for all x.
         Can we determine a series solution about x = 0 for the differential equation
 EXAMPLE
                                             y + (sin x)y + (1 + x2 )y = 0,
    5
         and if so, what is the radius of convergence?
             For this differential equation, p(x) = sin x and q(x) = 1 + x2 . Recall from calculus that sin x
         has a Taylor series expansion about x = 0 that converges for all x. Further, q also has a Taylor
         series expansion about x = 0, namely, q(x) = 1 + x2 , that converges for all x. Thus there is
                                                 ∞
         a series solution of the form y =           an xn with a0 and a1 arbitrary, and the series converges
                                                 n=0
         for all x.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4, determine φ (x0 ), φ (x0 ), and φ(4) (x0 ) for the given point x0
         if y = φ(x) is a solution of the given initial value problem.
           1. y + xy + y = 0;       y(0) = 1,     y (0) = 0
                           
           2. y + (sin x)y + (cos x)y = 0;           y(0) = 0,     y (0) = 1
           3. x2 y + (1 + x)y + 3(ln x)y = 0;         y(1) = 2,     y (1) = 0
                    2                                        
           4. y + x y + (sin x)y = 0;         y(0) = a0 ,      y (0) = a1
         In each of Problems 5 through 8, determine a lower bound for the radius of convergence of
         series solutions about each given point x0 for the given differential equation.
           5. y + 4y + 6xy = 0;        x0 = 0,    x0 = 4
           6. (x2 − 2x − 3)y + xy + 4y = 0;           x0 = 4,    x0 = −4,      x0 = 0
                               
           7. (1 + x )y + 4xy + y = 0;
                      3
                                                  x0 = 0,    x0 = 2
           8. xy + y = 0;        x0 = 1
           9. Determine a lower bound for the radius of convergence of series solutions about the given
              x0 for each of the differential equations in Problems 1 through 14 of Section 5.2.
         10. The Chebyshev Equation. The Chebyshev7 differential equation is
                                                  (1 − x2 )y − xy + α2 y = 0,
              where α is a constant.
              (a) Determine two solutions in powers of x for |x| < 1, and show that they form a
              fundamental set of solutions.
              (b) Show that if α is a nonnegative integer n, then there is a polynomial solution of
              degree n. These polynomials, when properly normalized, are called the Chebyshev
              polynomials. They are very useful in problems that require a polynomial approximation
              to a function defined on −1 ≤ x ≤ 1.
              (c) Find a polynomial solution for each of the cases α = n = 0, 1, 2, 3.
         7 Pafnuty L. Chebyshev (1821–1894), the most influential nineteenth-century Russian mathematician, was
         for 35 years professor at the University of St. Petersburg, which produced a long line of distinguished
         mathematicians. His study of Chebyshev polynomials began in about 1854 as part of an investigation of
         the approximation of functions by polynomials. Chebyshev is also known for his work in number theory
         and probability.
For each of the differential equations in Problems 11 through 14, find the first four nonzero
terms in each of two power series solutions about the origin. Show that they form a fundamental
set of solutions. What do you expect the radius of convergence to be for each solution?
11. y + (sin x)y = 0                                    12. ex y + xy = 0
                     
13. (cos x)y + xy − 2y = 0                                14. e−x y + ln(1 + x)y − xy = 0
15. Let x and x2 be solutions of a differential equation P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0. Can you
     say whether the point x = 0 is an ordinary point or a singular point? Prove your answer.
First Order Equations. The series methods discussed in this section are directly applicable
to the first order linear differential equation P(x)y + Q(x)y = 0 at a point x0 , if the function
p = Q/P has a Taylor series expansion about that point. Such a point is called an ordinary
                                                                           ∞
point, and further, the radius of convergence of the series y =                an (x − x0 )n is at least as large
                                                                           n=0
as the radius of convergence of the series for Q/P. In each of Problems 16 through 21, solve the
given differential equation by a series in powers of x and verify that a0 is arbitrary in each case.
Problems 20 and 21 involve nonhomogeneous differential equations to which series methods
can be easily extended. Where possible, compare the series solution with the solution obtained
by using the methods of Chapter 2.
16. y − y = 0                                            17. y − xy = 0
           x2
18. y = e y,             three terms only                 19. (1 − x)y = y
20. y − y = x2                                           21. y + xy = 1 + x
The Legendre Equation.            Problems 22 through 29 deal with the Legendre8 equation
                                    (1 − x2 )y − 2xy + α(α + 1)y = 0.
As indicated in Example 3,the point x = 0 is an ordinary point of this equation,and the distance
from the origin to the nearest zero of P(x) = 1 − x2 is 1. Hence the radius of convergence of
series solutions about x = 0 is at least 1. Also notice that we need to consider only α > −1
because if α ≤ −1, then the substitution α = −(1 + γ), where γ ≥ 0, leads to the Legendre
equation (1 − x2 )y − 2xy + γ(γ + 1)y = 0.
22. Show that two solutions of the Legendre equation for |x| < 1 are
                                α(α + 1) 2 α(α − 2)(α + 1)(α + 3) 4
                  y1 (x) = 1 −             x +                               x
                                    2!                        4!
                               ∞
                                          α · · · (α − 2m + 2)(α + 1) · · · (α + 2m − 1) 2m
                            +      (−1)m                                                     x ,
                               m=3
                                                                 (2m)!
                                 (α − 1)(α + 2) 3 (α − 1)(α − 3)(α + 2)(α + 4) 5
                  y2 (x) = x −                     x +                                     x
                                       3!                               5!
                               ∞
                                          (α − 1) · · · (α − 2m + 1)(α + 2) · · · (α + 2m) 2m+1
                            +      (−1)m                                                        x     .
                               m=3
                                                               (2m + 1)!
8Adrien-Marie Legendre (1752–1833) held various positions in the French Académie des Sciences from
1783 onward. His primary work was in the fields of elliptic functions and number theory. The Legendre
functions, solutions of Legendre’s equation, first appeared in 1784 in his study of the attraction of spheroids.
23. Show that if α is zero or a positive even integer 2n, the series solution y1 reduces to a
     polynomial of degree 2n containing only even powers of x. Find the polynomials corre-
     sponding to α = 0, 2, and 4. Show that if α is a positive odd integer 2n + 1, the series
     solution y2 reduces to a polynomial of degree 2n + 1 containing only odd powers of x.
     Find the polynomials corresponding to α = 1, 3, and 5.
24. The Legendre polynomial Pn (x) is defined as the polynomial solution of the Legendre
     equation with α = n that also satisfies the condition Pn (1) = 1.
     (a) Using the results of Problem 23, find the Legendre polynomials P0 (x), . . . , P5 (x).
     (b) Plot the graphs of P0 (x), . . . , P5 (x) for −1 ≤ x ≤ 1.
     (c) Find the zeros of P0 (x), . . . , P5 (x).
25. It can be shown that the general formula for Pn (x) is
                                            1  (−1)k (2n − 2k)! n−2k
                                                n/2
                                Pn (x) =                                   x     ,
                                           2n k=0 k!(n − k)!(n − 2k)!
     where n/2 denotes the greatest integer less than or equal to n/2. By observing the form
     of Pn (x) for n even and n odd, show that Pn (−1) = (−1)n .
26. The Legendre polynomials play an important role in mathematical physics. For example, in
     solving Laplace’s equation (the potential equation) in spherical coordinates, we encounter
     the equation
                       d2 F(φ)          dF(φ)
                                + cot φ           + n(n + 1)F(φ) = 0,          0 < φ < π,
                         dφ2               dφ
     where n is a positive integer. Show that the change of variable x = cos φ leads to the
     Legendre equation with α = n for y = f (x) = F(arccos x).
27. Show that for n = 0, 1, 2, 3, the corresponding Legendre polynomial is given by
                                                     1    dn
                                        Pn (x) =              (x2 − 1)n .
                                                    2n n! dxn
     This formula, known as Rodrigues’s formula,9 is true for all positive integers n.
28. Show that the Legendre equation can also be written as
                                         [(1 − x2 )y ] = −α(α + 1)y.
     Then it follows that
          [(1 − x2 )Pn (x)] = −n(n + 1)Pn (x)      and    [(1 − x2 )Pm
                                                                          (x)] = −m(m + 1)Pm (x).
     By multiplying the first equation by Pm (x) and the second equation by Pn (x), integrating
     by parts, and then subtracting one equation from the other, show that
                                   1
                                      Pn (x)Pm (x) dx = 0         if n  = m.
                                   −1
     This property of the Legendre polynomials is known as the orthogonality property. If
     m = n, it can be shown that the value of the preceding integral is 2/(2n + 1).
9 Benjamin Olinde Rodrigues (1795–1851) published this result as part of his doctoral thesis from the
University of Paris in 1815. He then became a banker and social reformer but retained an interest in
mathematics. Unfortunately, his later papers were not appreciated until the late twentieth century.
               29. Given a polynomial f of degree n, it is possible to express f as a linear combination of
                    P0 , P1 , P2 , . . . , Pn :
                                                                          n
                                                                  f (x) =      ak Pk (x).
                                                                          k=0
                    Using the result of Problem 28, show that
                                                                           1
                                                                  2k + 1
                                                            ak =                f (x)Pk (x) dx.
                                                                      2     −1
5.4 Euler Equations; Regular Singular Points
               In this section we will begin to consider how to solve equations of the form
                                                         P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0                          (1)
               in the neighborhood of a singular point x0 . Recall that if the functions P, Q, and R
               are polynomials having no factors common to all three of them, then the singular
               points of Eq. (1) are the points for which P(x) = 0.
               Euler Equations. A relatively simple differential equation that has a singular point is
               the Euler equation10
                                                         L[y] = x2 y + αxy + βy = 0,                        (2)
               where α and β are real constants. In this case P(x) = x2 , so x = 0 is the only singu-
               lar point for Eq. (2); all other points are ordinary points. For convenience we first
               consider the interval x > 0; later we extend our results to the interval x < 0.
                  Observe that (xr ) = rxr−1 and (xr ) = r(r − 1)xr−2 . Hence, if we assume that
               Eq. (2) has a solution of the form
                                                                       y = xr ,                                (3)
               then we obtain
                                                L[xr ] = x2 (xr ) + αx(xr ) + βxr
                                                         = x2 r(r − 1)xr−2 + αx(rxr−1 ) + βxr
                                                         = xr [r(r − 1) + αr + β].                             (4)
               If r is a root of the quadratic equation
                                                        F(r) = r(r − 1) + αr + β = 0,                          (5)
               then L[xr ] is zero, and y = xr is a solution of Eq. (2). The roots of Eq. (5) are
                                                                             
                                                              −(α − 1) ± (α − 1)2 − 4β
                                                  r 1 , r2 =                                    ,              (6)
                                                                              2
               and F(r) = (r − r1 )(r − r2 ). As for second order linear equations with constant coef-
               ficients, we consider separately the cases in which the roots are real and different, real
               10This equation is sometimes called the Cauchy–Euler equation or the equidimensional equation. Euler
               studied it in about 1740, but its solution was known to Johann Bernoulli before 1700.
        but equal, and complex conjugates. Indeed, the entire discussion of Euler equations
        is similar to the treatment of second order linear equations with constant coefficients
        in Chapter 3, with erx replaced by xr .
        Real, Distinct Roots. If F(r) = 0 has real roots r1 and r2 , with r1 = r2 , then y1 (x) = xr1
        and y2 (x) = xr2 are solutions of Eq. (2). Since
                                         W(xr1 , xr2 ) = (r2 − r1 )xr1 +r2 −1
        is nonzero for r1  = r2 and x > 0, it follows that the general solution of Eq. (2) is
                                         y = c1 xr1 + c2 xr2 ,      x > 0.                         (7)
        Note that if r is not a rational number, then xr is defined by xr = er ln x .
        Solve
EXAMPLE                                  2x2 y + 3xy − y = 0,     x > 0.                        (8)
   1       Substituting y = x in Eq. (8) gives
                              r
                       xr [2r(r − 1) + 3r − 1] = xr (2r 2 + r − 1) = xr (2r − 1)(r + 1) = 0.
        Hence r1 = 21 and r2 = −1, so the general solution of Eq. (8) is
                                          y = c1 x1/2 + c2 x−1 ,    x > 0.                         (9)
        Equal Roots. If the roots r1 and r2 are equal, then we obtain only one solution
        y1 (x) = xr1 of the assumed form. A second solution can be obtained by the method
        of reduction of order, but for the purpose of our future discussion we consider an
        alternative method. Since r1 = r2 , it follows that F(r) = (r − r1 )2 . Thus in this case,
        not only does F(r1 ) = 0 but also F  (r1 ) = 0. This suggests differentiating Eq. (4) with
        respect to r and then setting r equal to r1 . By differentiating Eq. (4) with respect to
        r, we obtain
                                   ∂              ∂              ∂
                                      L[xr ] = [xr F(r)] = [xr (r − r1 )2 ]
                                   ∂r             ∂r             ∂r
                                             = (r − r1 )2 xr ln x + 2(r − r1 )xr .                (10)
        However, by interchanging differentiation with respect to x and with respect to r, we
        also obtain                                          
                                       ∂                 ∂ r
                                          L[xr ] = L        x = L[xr ln x].
                                      ∂r                 ∂r
        The right side of Eq. (10) is zero for r = r1 ; consequently, L[xr1 ln x] = 0 also.
        Therefore,
                                           y2 (x) = xr1 ln x,       x>0                           (11)
        is a second solution of Eq. (2). By evaluating the Wronskian of y1 and y2 , we find that
                                            W(xr1 , xr1 ln x) = x2r1 −1 .
        Hence xr1 and xr1 ln x are a fundamental set of solutions for x > 0, and the general
        solution of Eq. (2) is
                                       y = (c1 + c2 ln x)xr1 ,        x > 0.                      (12)
        Solve
EXAMPLE                                   x2 y + 5xy + 4y = 0,         x > 0.                    (13)
   2        Substituting y = xr in Eq. (13) gives
                                   xr [r(r − 1) + 5r + 4] = xr (r 2 + 4r + 4) = 0.
        Hence r1 = r2 = −2, and
                                           y = x−2 (c1 + c2 ln x),        x>0                       (14)
        is the general solution of Eq. (13).
        Complex Roots. Finally, suppose that the roots r1 and r2 of Eq. (5) are complex con-
        jugates, say, r1 = λ + iμ and r2 = λ − iμ, with μ  = 0. We must now explain what is
        meant by xr when r is complex. Remembering that
                                                        xr = er ln x                                (15)
        when x > 0 and r is real, we can use this equation to define x when r is complex.r
        Then, using Euler’s formula for eiμ ln x , we obtain
                        xλ+iμ = e(λ+iμ) ln x = eλ ln x eiμ ln x = xλ eiμ ln x
                                             = xλ [cos(μ ln x) + i sin(μ ln x)],           x > 0.   (16)
        With this definition of xr for complex values of r, it can be verified that the usual
        laws of algebra and the differential calculus hold, and hence xr1 and xr2 are indeed
        solutions of Eq. (2). The general solution of Eq. (2) is
                                                y = c1 xλ+iμ + c2 xλ−iμ .                           (17)
        The disadvantage of this expression is that the functions xλ+iμ and xλ−iμ are complex-
        valued. Recall that we had a similar situation for the second order differential
        equation with constant coefficients when the roots of the characteristic equation
        were complex. Just as we did then, we can use Theorem 3.2.6 to obtain real-valued
        solutions of Eq. (2) by taking the real and imaginary parts of xλ+iμ , namely,
                                      xλ cos(μ ln x)       and     xλ sin(μ ln x).                  (18)
        A straightforward calculation shows that
                                  W[xλ cos(μ ln x), xλ sin(μ ln x)] = μx2λ−1 .
        Hence these solutions form a fundamental set of solutions for x > 0, and the general
        solution of Eq. (2) is
                              y = c1 xλ cos(μ ln x) + c2 xλ sin(μ ln x),             x > 0.         (19)
        Solve
EXAMPLE                                           x2 y + xy + y = 0.                             (20)
   3        Substituting y = xr in Eq. (20) gives
                                       xr [r(r − 1) + r + 1] = xr (r 2 + 1) = 0.
        Hence r = ±i, and the general solution is
                                     y = c1 cos(ln x) + c2 sin(ln x),         x > 0.                (21)
                      λ                                                                           λ
        The factor x does not appear explicitly in Eq. (21) because in this example λ = 0 and x = 1.
         Now let us consider the qualitative behavior of the solutions of Eq. (2) near the
      singular point x = 0. This depends entirely on the values of the exponents r1 and r2 .
      First, if r is real and positive, then xr → 0 as x tends to zero through positive values.
      On the other hand, if r is real and negative, then xr becomes unbounded. Finally, if
      r = 0, then xr = 1. Figure 5.4.1 shows these possibilities for various values of r. If r is
      complex, then a typical solution is xλ cos(μ ln x). This function becomes unbounded or
      approaches zero if λ is negative or positive, respectively, and also oscillates more and
      more rapidly as x → 0. This behavior is shown in Figures 5.4.2 and 5.4.3 for selected
      values of λ and μ. If λ = 0, the oscillation is of constant amplitude. Finally, if there
      are repeated roots, then one solution is of the form xr ln x, which tends to zero if r > 0
      and becomes unbounded if r ≤ 0. An example of each case is shown in Figure 5.4.4.
                  y
                             y = x–1/2      y = x–3/2
                  2
                           y = x0
                  1
                          y = x1/2
                                        y = x3/2
                                                                                                  x
                         FIGURE 5.4.1        Solutions of an Euler equation; real roots.
   y                                                               y
   2         y = x–1/4 cos(5 ln x)                                  1
             0.125      0.25     0.375         0.5 x                        0.5        1      1.5      2 x
  –2                                                              –1     y = x1/2 cos(5 ln x)
FIGURE 5.4.2 Solution of an Euler equation;                 FIGURE 5.4.3 Solution of an Euler equation;
     complex roots with negative real part.                       complex roots with positive real part.
                                       y
                                       1
                                                  0.5         1       1.5        2 x
                                           y = x ln x
                                      –1              y = x –1 ln x
             FIGURE 5.4.4 Typical second solutions of an Euler equation with equal roots.
   The extension of the solutions of Eq. (2) into the interval x < 0 can be carried out
in a relatively straightforward manner. The difficulty lies in understanding what is
meant by xr when x is negative and r is not an integer; similarly, ln x has not been
defined for x < 0. The solutions of the Euler equation that we have given for x > 0
can be shown to be valid for x < 0, but in general they are complex-valued. Thus in
Example 1 the solution x1/2 is imaginary for x < 0.
   It is always possible to obtain real-valued solutions of the Euler equation (2) in the
interval x < 0 by making the following change of variable. Let x = −ξ, where ξ > 0,
and let y = u(ξ). Then we have
                                                             
                dy    du dξ          du        d2 y      d        du dξ    d2 u
                   =           =− ,                 =           −        =      .    (22)
                dx    dξ dx          dξ        dx2       dξ       dξ dx    dξ 2
Thus, for x < 0, Eq. (2) takes the form
                              d2 u         du
                           ξ2    2
                                   + αξ       + βu = 0,          ξ > 0.              (23)
                              dξ           dξ
But except for names of the variables, this is exactly the same as Eq. (2); from Eqs. (7),
(12), and (19), we have
                               ⎧ r1
                               ⎪  c ξ + c2 ξ r2
                               ⎨ 1
                       u(ξ) = (c1 + c2 ln ξ)ξ r1                                     (24)
                               ⎪
                               ⎩ λ
                                  c1 ξ cos(μ ln ξ) + c2 ξ λ sin(μ ln ξ),
depending on whether the zeros of F(r) = r(r − 1) + αr + β are real and different,
real and equal, or complex conjugates. To obtain u in terms of x, we replace ξ by −x
in Eqs. (24).
   We can combine the results for x > 0 and x < 0 by recalling that |x| = x when x > 0
and that |x| = −x when x < 0. Thus we need only replace x by |x| in Eqs. (7), (12), and
(19) to obtain real-valued solutions valid in any interval not containing the origin.
   Hence the general solution of the Euler equation (2)
                                     x2 y + αxy + βy = 0
in any interval not containing the origin is determined by the roots r1 and r2 of the
equation
                               F(r) = r(r − 1) + αr + β = 0
as follows. If the roots are real and different, then
                                      y = c1 |x|r1 + c2 |x|r2 .                      (25)
If the roots are real and equal, then
                                   y = (c1 + c2 ln |x|)|x|r1 .                       (26)
If the roots are complex conjugates, then
                        y = |x|λ [c1 cos(μ ln |x|) + c2 sin(μ ln |x|)] ,             (27)
where r1 , r2 = λ ± iμ.
   The solutions of an Euler equation of the form
                            (x − x0 )2 y + α(x − x0 )y + βy = 0                      (28)
are similar. If we look for solutions of the form y = (x − x0 )r , then the general solution
is given by Eq. (25), Eq. (26), or Eq. (27) with x replaced by x − x0 . Alternatively,
we can reduce Eq. (28) to the form of Eq. (2) by making the change of independent
variable t = x − x0 .
Regular Singular Points. We now return to a consideration of the general equation (1)
                               P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0,
where x0 is a singular point. This means that P(x0 ) = 0 and that at least one of Q and
R is not zero at x0 .
   Unfortunately, if we attempt to use the methods of the preceding two sections to
solve Eq. (1) in the neighborhood of a singular point x0 , we find that these methods
fail. This is because the solution of Eq. (1) is often not analytic at x0 and consequently
cannot be represented by a Taylor series in powers of x − x0 . Examples 1, 2, and 3
illustrate this fact; in each of these examples, the solution fails to have a power series
expansion about the singular point x = 0. Therefore, to have any chance of solving
Eq. (1) in the neighborhood of a singular point, we must use a more general type of
series expansion.
   Since the singular points of a differential equation are usually few in number, we
might ask whether we can simply ignore them, especially since we already know how
to construct solutions about ordinary points. However, this is not feasible. The sin-
gular points determine the principal features of the solution to a much larger extent
than you might at first suspect. In the neighborhood of a singular point the solution
often becomes large in magnitude or experiences rapid changes in magnitude. For
example, the solutions found in Examples 1, 2, and 3 are illustrations of this fact. Thus
the behavior of a physical system modeled by a differential equation frequently is
most interesting in the neighborhood of a singular point. Often geometric singular-
ities in a physical problem, such as corners or sharp edges, lead to singular points
in the corresponding differential equation. Thus, although at first we might want to
avoid the few points where a differential equation is singular, it is precisely at these
points that it is necessary to study the solution most carefully.
   As an alternative to analytical methods, we can consider the use of numerical
methods, which are discussed in Chapter 8. However, these methods are ill suited
for the study of solutions near a singular point. Thus, even if we adopt a numerical
approach, it is advantageous to combine it with the analytical methods of this chapter
in order to examine the behavior of solutions near singular points.
   Without any additional information about the behavior of Q/P and R/P in the
neighborhood of the singular point, it is impossible to describe the behavior
of the solutions of Eq. (1) near x = x0 . It may be that there are two distinct solu-
tions of Eq. (1) that remain bounded as x → x0 (as in Example 3); or there may be
only one, with the other becoming unbounded as x → x0 (as in Example 1); or they
may both become unbounded as x → x0 (as in Example 2). If Eq. (1) has solutions
that become unbounded as x → x0 , it is often important to determine how these
solutions behave as x → x0 . For example, does y → ∞ in the same way as (x − x0 )−1
or |x − x0 |−1/2 , or in some other manner?
           Our goal is to extend the method already developed for solving Eq. (1) near an
        ordinary point so that it also applies to the neighborhood of a singular point x0 .
        To do this in a reasonably simple manner, it is necessary to restrict ourselves to cases
        in which the singularities in the functions Q/P and R/P at x = x0 are not too severe—
        that is, to what we might call “weak singularities.” At this stage it is not clear exactly
        what is an acceptable singularity. However, as we develop the method of solution,
        you will see that the appropriate conditions (see also Section 5.6, Problem 21) to
        distinguish “weak singularities” are
                                                             Q(x)
                                               lim (x − x0 )          is finite                         (29)
                                              x→x0           P(x)
        and
                                                              R(x)
                                               lim (x − x0 )2          is finite.                       (30)
                                              x→x0             P(x)
        This means that the singularity in Q/P can be no worse than (x − x0 )−1 and the singu-
        larity in R/P can be no worse than (x − x0 )−2 . Such a point is called a regular singular
        point of Eq. (1). For equations with more general coefficients than polynomials, x0
        is a regular singular point of Eq. (1) if it is a singular point and if both11
                                                  Q(x)                        R(x)
                                       (x − x0 )            and    (x − x0 )2                          (31)
                                                   P(x)                       P(x)
        have convergentTaylor series about x0 —that is,if the functions in Eq. (31) are analytic
        at x = x0 . Equations (29) and (30) imply that this will be the case when P, Q, and R
        are polynomials. Any singular point of Eq. (1) that is not a regular singular point is
        called an irregular singular point of Eq. (1).
           Observe that the conditions in Eqs. (29) and (30) are satisfied by the Euler equation
        (28). Thus the singularity in an Euler equation is a regular singular point. Indeed, we
        will see that all equations of the form (1) behave very much like Euler equations near
        a regular singular point. That is, solutions near a regular singular point may include
        powers of x with negative or nonintegral exponents, logarithms, or sines or cosines
        of logarithmic arguments.
           In the following sections we discuss how to solve Eq. (1) in the neighborhood of a
        regular singular point. A discussion of the solutions of differential equations in the
        neighborhood of irregular singular points is more complicated and may be found in
        more advanced books.
        Determine the singular points of the Legendre equation
EXAMPLE
                                            (1 − x2 )y − 2xy + α(α + 1)y = 0                         (32)
   4
        and determine whether they are regular or irregular.
        11The functions given in Eq. (31) may not be defined at x , in which case their values at x are to be
                                                                     0                            0
        assigned as their limits as x → x0 .
           In this case P(x) = 1 − x2 , so the singular points are x = 1 and x = −1. Observe that when
        we divide Eq. (32) by 1 − x2 , the coefficients of y and y are −2x/(1 − x2 ) and α(α + 1)/(1 − x2 ),
        respectively. We consider the point x = 1 first. Thus, from Eqs. (29) and (30), we calculate
                                          −2x               (x − 1)(−2x)             2x
                            lim(x − 1)             = lim                    = lim        =1
                            x→1         1 − x2         x→1 (1 − x)(1 + x)      x→1 1 + x
        and
                                             α(α + 1)            (x − 1)2 α(α + 1)
                               lim(x − 1)2                = lim
                               x→1             1−x    2      x→1   (1 − x)(1 + x)
                                                                 (x − 1)(−α)(α + 1)
                                                          = lim                        = 0.
                                                             x→1          1+x
        Since these limits are finite, the point x = 1 is a regular singular point. It can be shown in a
        similar manner that x = −1 is also a regular singular point.
        Determine the singular points of the differential equation
EXAMPLE
                                        2x(x − 2)2 y + 3xy + (x − 2)y = 0
   5
        and classify them as regular or irregular.
           Dividing the differential equation by 2x(x − 2)2 , we have
                                                      3                1
                                        y +               y +             y = 0,
                                                2(x − 2)  2       2x(x − 2)
        so p(x) = Q(x)/P(x) = 3/2(x − 2)2 and q(x) = R(x)/P(x) = 1/2x(x − 2). The singular points
        are x = 0 and x = 2. Consider x = 0. We have
                                                                      3
                                           lim xp(x) = lim x                 = 0,
                                           x→0             x→0   2(x − 2)2
        and
                                                                       1
                                         lim x2 q(x) = lim x2                 = 0.
                                         x→0               x→0     2x(x − 2)
        Since these limits are finite, x = 0 is a regular singular point. For x = 2 we have
                                                                      3                3
                             lim(x − 2)p(x) = lim(x − 2)                    = lim           ,
                             x→2                     x→2         2(x − 2)2     x→2 2(x − 2)
        so the limit does not exist; hence x = 2 is an irregular singular point.
        Determine the singular points of
EXAMPLE
                                               π   2
   6                                    x−           y + (cos x)y + (sin x)y = 0
                                               2
        and classify them as regular or irregular.
          The only singular point is x = π/2. To study it, we consider the functions
                                           π                     π   Q(x)       cos x
                                     x−         p(x) = x −                  =
                                            2                    2   P(x)      x − π/2
           and
                                             π   2                 π  2 R(x)
                                      x−           q(x) = x −                 = sin x.
                                             2                     2     P(x)
         Starting from the Taylor series for cos x about x = π/2, we find that
                                    cos x              (x − π/2)2        (x − π/2)4
                                              = −1 +                 −                + ···,
                                   x − π/2                  3!                5!
         which converges for all x. Similarly, sin x is analytic at x = π/2. Therefore, we conclude that
         π/2 is a regular singular point for this equation.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 12, determine the general solution of the given differential
         equation that is valid in any interval not including the singular point.
          1. x2 y + 4xy + 2y = 0                               2. (x + 1)2 y + 3(x + 1)y + 0.75y = 0
          3. x2 y − 3xy + 4y = 0                               4. x2 y + 3xy + 5y = 0
          5. x2 y − xy + y = 0                                 6. (x − 1)2 y + 8(x − 1)y + 12y = 0
          7. x2 y + 6xy − y = 0                                8. 2x2 y − 4xy + 6y = 0
               2         
          9. x y − 5xy + 9y = 0                                  10. (x − 2)2 y + 5(x − 2)y + 8y = 0
         11. x2 y + 2xy + 4y = 0                              12. x2 y − 4xy + 4y = 0
         In each of Problems 13 through 16, find the solution of the given initial value problem. Plot
         the graph of the solution and describe how the solution behaves as x → 0.
         13. 2x2 y + xy − 3y = 0,         y(1) = 1,   y (1) = 4
         14. 4x2 y + 8xy + 17y = 0,         y(1) = 2,     y (1) = −3
         15. x2 y − 3xy + 4y = 0,         y(−1) = 2,     y (−1) = 3
         16. x2 y + 3xy + 5y = 0,         y(1) = 1,   y (1) = −1
         In each of Problems 17 through 34, find all singular points of the given equation and determine
         whether each one is regular or irregular.
         17. xy + (1 − x)y + xy = 0                           18. x2 (1 − x)2 y + 2xy + 4y = 0
                                     
         19. x (1 − x)y + (x − 2)y − 3xy = 0
               2
                                                                 20. x2 (1 − x2 )y + (2/x)y + 4y = 0
                     2 2               
         21. (1 − x ) y + x(1 − x)y + (1 + x)y = 0
         22. x2 y + xy + (x2 − ν2 )y = 0,       Bessel equation
         23. (x + 3)y − 2xy + (1 − x2 )y = 0
         24. x(1 − x2 )3 y + (1 − x2 )2 y + 2(1 + x)y = 0
         25. (x + 2)2 (x − 1)y + 3(x − 1)y − 2(x + 2)y = 0
         26. x(3 − x)y + (x + 1)y − 2y = 0
         27. (x2 + x − 2)y + (x + 1)y + 2y = 0                28. xy + ex y + (3 cos x)y = 0
                           
         29. y + (ln |x|)y + 3xy = 0                             30. x2 y + 2(ex − 1)y + (e−x cos x)y = 0
         31. x2 y − 3(sin x)y + (1 + x2 )y = 0                32. xy + y + (cot x)y = 0
         33. (sin x)y + xy + 4y = 0                           34. (x sin x)y + 3y + xy = 0
         35. Find all values of α for which all solutions of x2 y + αxy + (5/2)y = 0 approach zero as
             x → 0.
         36. Find all values of β for which all solutions of x2 y + βy = 0 approach zero as x → 0.
37. Find γ so that the solution of the initial value problem x2 y − 2y = 0, y(1) = 1, y (1) = γ
     is bounded as x → 0.
38. Find all values of α for which all solutions of x2 y + αxy + (5/2)y = 0 approach zero as
     x → ∞.
39. Consider the Euler equation x2 y + αxy + βy = 0. Find conditions on α and β so that:
     (a) All solutions approach zero as x → 0.
     (b) All solutions are bounded as x → 0.
     (c) All solutions approach zero as x → ∞.
     (d) All solutions are bounded as x → ∞.
     (e) All solutions are bounded both as x → 0 and as x → ∞.
40. Using the method of reduction of order, show that if r1 is a repeated root of
                                           r(r − 1) + αr + β = 0,
     then xr1 and xr1 ln x are solutions of x2 y + αxy + βy = 0 for x > 0.
In each of Problems 41 and 42, show that the point x = 0 is a regular singular point. In each
                                                ∞
problem try to find solutions of the form            an xn . Show that (except for constant multiples)
                                                n=0
there is only one nonzero solution of this form in Problem 41 and that there are no nonzero
solutions of this form in Problem 42. Thus in neither case can the general solution be found in
this manner. This is typical of equations with singular points.
41. 2xy + 3y + xy = 0
42. 2x2 y + 3xy − (1 + x)y = 0
43. Singularities at Infinity. The definitions of an ordinary point and a regular singular point
     given in the preceding sections apply only if the point x0 is finite. In more advanced work
     in differential equations, it is often necessary to consider the point at infinity. This is done
     by making the change of variable ξ = 1/x and studying the resulting equation at ξ = 0.
     Show that, for the differential equation
                                      P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0,
     the point at infinity is an ordinary point if
                                                             
                                 1     2P(1/ξ) Q(1/ξ)                   R(1/ξ)
                                                 −               and
                             P(1/ξ)        ξ            ξ2             ξ 4 P(1/ξ)
     have Taylor series expansions about ξ = 0. Show also that the point at infinity is a regular
     singular point if at least one of the above functions does not have a Taylor series expansion,
     but both                                                
                                 ξ     2P(1/ξ) Q(1/ξ)                   R(1/ξ)
                                                 −               and
                             P(1/ξ)        ξ            ξ2             ξ 2 P(1/ξ)
     do have such expansions.
In each of Problems 44 through 49, use the results of Problem 43 to determine whether the
point at infinity is an ordinary point, a regular singular point, or an irregular singular point of
the given differential equation.
44. y + y = 0
45. x2 y + xy − 4y = 0
46. (1 − x2 )y − 2xy + α(α + 1)y = 0,          Legendre equation
                47. x2 y + xy + (x2 − ν2 )y = 0,        Bessel equation
                            
                48. y − 2xy + λy = 0,            Hermite equation
                      
                49. y − xy = 0,          Airy equation
5.5 Series Solutions Near a Regular Singular Point, Part I
                We now consider the question of solving the general second order linear equation
                                                   P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0                          (1)
                in the neighborhood of a regular singular point x = x0 . For convenience we assume
                that x0 = 0. If x0  = 0, we can transform the equation into one for which the regular
                singular point is at the origin by letting x − x0 equal t.
                   The assumption that x = 0 is a regular singular point of Eq. (1) means that
                xQ(x)/P(x) = xp(x) and x2 R(x)/P(x) = x2 q(x) have finite limits as x → 0 and are
                analytic at x = 0. Thus they have convergent power series expansions of the form
                                                       ∞                          ∞
                                            xp(x) =         pn x n ,     x2 q(x) =     qn x n ,          (2)
                                                       n=0                         n=0
                on some interval |x| < ρ about the origin, where ρ > 0. To make the quantities xp(x)
                and x2 q(x) appear in Eq. (1), it is convenient to divide Eq. (1) by P(x) and then to
                multiply by x2 , obtaining
                                                x2 y + x[xp(x)]y + [x2 q(x)]y = 0,                    (3)
                or
                                      x2 y + x(p0 + p1 x + · · · + pn xn + · · ·)y
                                                      + (q0 + q1 x + · · · + qn xn + · · ·)y = 0.        (4)
                If all of the coefficients pn and qn are zero, except possibly
                                                        xQ(x)                       x2 R(x)
                                            p0 = lim                 and  q0 = lim             ,         (5)
                                                  x→0 P(x)                       x→0 P(x)
                then Eq. (4) reduces to the Euler equation
                                                       x2 y + p0 xy + q0 y = 0,                       (6)
                which was discussed in the preceding section. In general, of course, some of the coef-
                ficients pn and qn , n ≥ 1, are not zero. However, the essential character of solutions
                of Eq. (4) in the neighborhood of the singular point is identical to that of solu-
                tions of the Euler equation (6). The presence of the terms p1 x + · · · + pn xn + · · · and
                q1 x + · · · + qn xn + · · · merely complicates the calculations.
                   We restrict our discussion primarily to the interval x > 0. The interval x < 0 can
                be treated, just as for the Euler equation, by making the change of variable x = −ξ
                and then solving the resulting equation for ξ > 0.
                   The coefficients in Eq. (4) can be viewed as “Euler coefficients” times power series.
                To see this, you can write the coefficient of y in Eq. (4) as
                                   p0 x[1 + (p1 /p0 )x + (p2 /p0 )x2 + · · · + (pn /p0 )xn + · · ·],
        and similarly for the coefficient of y. Thus it may seem natural to seek solutions of
        Eq. (4) in the form of “Euler solutions” times power series. Hence we assume that
                                                                              ∞             ∞
                       y = xr (a0 + a1 x + · · · + an xn + · · ·) = xr             an xn =       an xr+n ,       (7)
                                                                              n=0            n=0
        where a0  = 0. In other words, r is the exponent of the first nonzero term in the series,
        and a0 is its coefficient. As part of the solution, we have to determine:
        1. The values of r for which Eq. (1) has a solution of the form (7).
        2. The recurrence relation for the coefficients an .
                                                             ∞
        3. The radius of convergence of the series               an xn .
                                                             n=0
            The general theory was constructed by Frobenius12 and is fairly complicated.
        Rather than trying to present this theory, we simply assume, in this and the next
        two sections, that there does exist a solution of the stated form. In particular, we
        assume that any power series in an expression for a solution has a nonzero radius of
        convergence and concentrate on showing how to determine the coefficients in such
        a series. To illustrate the method of Frobenius, we first consider an example.
        Solve the differential equation
EXAMPLE
                                               2x2 y − xy + (1 + x)y = 0.                                     (8)
   1        It is easy to show that x = 0 is a regular singular point of Eq. (8). Further, xp(x) = −1/2
        and x2 q(x) = (1 + x)/2. Thus p0 = −1/2, q0 = 1/2, q1 = 1/2, and all other p’s and q’s are zero.
        Then, from Eq. (6), the Euler equation corresponding to Eq. (8) is
                                                   2x2 y − xy + y = 0.                                        (9)
                                                                                                            
            To solve Eq. (8), we assume that there is a solution of the form (7). Then y and y are
        given by
                                                        ∞
                                                 y =       an (r + n)xr+n−1                                    (10)
                                                        n=0
        and
                                                ∞
                                          y =      an (r + n)(r + n − 1)xr+n−2 .                              (11)
                                                n=0
        By substituting the expressions for y, y , and y in Eq. (8), we obtain
                                                          ∞
                          2x2 y − xy + (1 + x)y =          2an (r + n)(r + n − 1)xr+n
                                                          n=0
                                               ∞                        ∞             ∞
                                           −       an (r + n)xr+n +          an xr+n +      an xr+n+1 .         (12)
                                               n=0                       n=0            n=0
        12 Ferdinand Georg Frobenius (1849–1917) grew up in the suburbs of Berlin, received his doctorate in 1870
        from the University of Berlin, and returned as professor in 1892. For most of the intervening years he was
        professor at the Eidgenössische Polytechnikum at Zürich. He showed how to construct series solutions
        about regular singular points in 1874. His most distinguished work, however, was in algebra, where he was
        one of the foremost early developers of group theory.
                                                         ∞
The last term in Eq. (12) can be written as                  an−1 xr+n , so by combining the terms in Eq. (12),
                                                         n=1
we obtain
         2x2 y − xy + (1 + x)y = a0 [2r(r − 1) − r + 1]xr
                            ∞
                                "                                                          #
                        +         [2(r + n)(r + n − 1) − (r + n) + 1] an + an−1 xr+n = 0.                  (13)
                            n=1
If Eq. (13) is to be satisfied for all x, the coefficient of each power of x in Eq. (13) must be zero.
From the coefficient of xr we obtain, since a0  = 0,
                         2r(r − 1) − r + 1 = 2r 2 − 3r + 1 = (r − 1)(2r − 1) = 0.                          (14)
Equation (14) is called the indicial equation for Eq. (8). Note that it is exactly the polynomial
equation we would obtain for the Euler equation (9) associated with Eq. (8). The roots of the
indicial equation are
                                              r1 = 1,           r2 = 1/2.                                  (15)
These values of r are called the exponents at the singularity for the regular singular point
x = 0. They determine the qualitative behavior of the solution (7) in the neighborhood of the
singular point.
   Now we return to Eq. (13) and set the coefficient of xr+n equal to zero. This gives the relation
                      [2(r + n)(r + n − 1) − (r + n) + 1] an + an−1 = 0,                   n ≥ 1,          (16)
or
                                                      an−1
                              an = −
                                        2(r + n)2 − 3(r + n) + 1
                                                        an−1
                                   =−                                       ,       n ≥ 1.                 (17)
                                        [(r + n) − 1][2(r + n) − 1]
For each root r1 and r2 of the indicial equation, we use the recurrence relation (17) to determine
a set of coefficients a1 , a2 , . . . . For r = r1 = 1, Eq. (17) becomes
                                                        an−1
                                         an = −                   ,      n ≥ 1.
                                                   (2n + 1)n
Thus
                                                      a0
                                          a1 = −           ,
                                                     3·1
                                                      a1              a0
                                          a2 = −             =                 ,
                                                     5·2        (3 · 5)(1 · 2)
and
                                                a2                     a0
                                     a3 = −            =−                           .
                                               7·3           (3 · 5 · 7)(1 · 2 · 3)
In general, we have
                                                   (−1)n
                                 an =                                  a0 ,      n ≥ 4.                    (18)
                                        [3 · 5 · 7 · · · (2n + 1)]n!
If we multiply both the numerator and denominator of the right side of Eq. (18) by
2 · 4 · 6 · · · 2n = 2n n!, we can rewrite an as
                                                  (−1)n 2n
                                         an =                  a0 ,      n ≥ 1.
                                                 (2n + 1)!
Hence, if we omit the constant multiplier a0 , one solution of Eq. (8) is
                                                                          
                                                    ∞
                                                           (−1)n 2n n
                               y1 (x) = x 1 +                          x ,        x > 0.   (19)
                                                    n=1
                                                          (2n + 1)!
To determine the radius of convergence of the series in Eq. (19), we use the ratio test:
                                                 
                                      an+1 xn+1                       2|x|
                                lim              = lim                             =0
                               n→∞       an xn  n→∞ (2n + 2)(2n + 3)
for all x. Thus the series converges for all x.
   Corresponding to the second root r = r2 = 21 , we proceed similarly. From Eq. (17) we have
                                            an−1                   an−1
                              an = −                 =−                    ,     n ≥ 1.
                                        2n n − 21              n(2n − 1)
Hence
                                               a0
                                    a1 = −           ,
                                              1·1
                                               a1                a0
                                    a2 = −             =                   ,
                                              2·3          (1 · 2)(1 · 3)
                                               a2                       a0
                                    a3 = −             =−                           ,
                                              3·5            (1 · 2 · 3)(1 · 3 · 5)
and, in general,
                                                   (−1)n
                                 an =                                   a0 ,     n ≥ 4.    (20)
                                        n![1 · 3 · 5 · · · (2n − 1)]
Just as in the case of the first root r1 , we multiply the numerator and denominator by
2 · 4 · 6 · · · 2n = 2n n!. Then we have
                                                 (−1)n 2n
                                          an =                a0 ,       n ≥ 1.
                                                    (2n)!
Again omitting the constant multiplier a0 , we obtain the second solution
                                                                           
                                                       ∞
                                                            (−1)n 2n n
                              y2 (x) = x1/2 1 +                         x ,         x > 0. (21)
                                                       n=1
                                                              (2n)!
As before, we can show that the series in Eq. (21) converges for all x. Since y1 and y2 behave
like x and x1/2 , respectively, near x = 0, they form a fundamental set of solutions. Hence the
general solution of Eq. (8) is
                                       y = c1 y1 (x) + c2 y2 (x),            x > 0.
   The preceding example illustrates that if x = 0 is a regular singular point, then
sometimes there are two solutions of the form (7) in the neighborhood of this point.
Similarly, if there is a regular singular point at x = x0 , then there may be two solutions
of the form
                                                             ∞
                                        y = (x − x0 )r             an (x − x0 )n           (22)
                                                             n=0
that are valid near x = x0 . However, just as an Euler equation may not have two
solutions of the form y = xr , so a more general equation with a regular singular point
may not have two solutions of the form (7) or (22). In particular, we show in the next
         section that if the roots r1 and r2 of the indicial equation are equal or differ by an
         integer, then the second solution normally has a more complicated structure. In all
         cases, though, it is possible to find at least one solution of the form (7) or (22); if r1
         and r2 differ by an integer, this solution corresponds to the larger value of r. If there
         is only one such solution, then the second solution involves a logarithmic term, just
         as for the Euler equation when the roots of the characteristic equation are equal. The
         method of reduction of order or some other procedure can be invoked to determine
         the second solution in such cases. This is discussed in Sections 5.6 and 5.7.
            If the roots of the indicial equation are complex, then they cannot be equal or differ
         by an integer,so there are always two solutions of the form (7) or (22). Of course,these
         solutions are complex-valued functions of x. However, as for the Euler equation, it
         is possible to obtain real-valued solutions by taking the real and imaginary parts of
         the complex solutions.
            Finally, we mention a practical point. If P, Q, and R are polynomials, it is often
         much better to work directly with Eq. (1) than with Eq. (3). This avoids the necessity
         of expressing xQ(x)/P(x) and x2 R(x)/P(x) as power series. For example, it is more
         convenient to consider the equation
                                           x(1 + x)y + 2y + xy = 0
         than to write it in the form
                                                    2x         x2
                                         x2 y +        y +          y = 0,
                                                  1+x          1+x
         which would entail expanding 2x/(1 + x) and x2 /(1 + x) in power series.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 10:
         (a) Show that the given differential equation has a regular singular point at x = 0.
         (b) Determine the indicial equation, the recurrence relation, and the roots of the indicial
         equation.
         (c) Find the series solution (x > 0) corresponding to the larger root.
         (d) If the roots are unequal and do not differ by an integer, find the series solution
         corresponding to the smaller root also.
                                                                                    
           1. 2xy + y + xy = 0                           2. x2 y + xy + x2 − 19 y = 0
           3. xy + y = 0                                  4. xy + y − y = 0
                 2       
           5. 3x y + 2xy + x y = 0
                               2
                                                            6. x2 y + xy + (x − 2)y = 0
                           
           7. xy + (1 − x)y − y = 0                         8. 2x2 y + 3xy + (2x2 − 1)y = 0
                2            
                                                                               
           9. x y − x(x + 3)y + (x + 3)y = 0               10. x2 y + x2 + 14 y = 0
         11. The Legendre equation of order α is
                                          (1 − x2 )y − 2xy + α(α + 1)y = 0.
              The solution of this equation near the ordinary point x = 0 was discussed in Problems 22
              and 23 of Section 5.3. In Example 4 of Section 5.4, it was shown that x = ±1 are regular
              singular points.
              (a) Determine the indicial equation and its roots for the point x = 1.
     (b) Find a series solution in powers of x − 1 for x − 1 > 0.
     Hint: Write 1 + x = 2 + (x − 1) and x = 1 + (x − 1). Alternatively, make the change of
     variable x − 1 = t and determine a series solution in powers of t.
12. The Chebyshev equation is
                                        (1 − x2 )y − xy + α2 y = 0,
     where α is a constant; see Problem 10 of Section 5.3.
     (a) Show that x = 1 and x = −1 are regular singular points, and find the exponents at
     each of these singularities.
     (b) Find two solutions about x = 1.
13. The Laguerre13 differential equation is
                                         xy + (1 − x)y + λy = 0.
     (a) Show that x = 0 is a regular singular point.
     (b) Determine the indicial equation, its roots, and the recurrence relation.
     (c) Find one solution (x > 0). Show that if λ = m, a positive integer, this solution reduces
     to a polynomial. When properly normalized, this polynomial is known as the Laguerre
     polynomial, Lm (x).
14. The Bessel equation of order zero is
                                            x2 y + xy + x2 y = 0.
     (a) Show that x = 0 is a regular singular point.
     (b) Show that the roots of the indicial equation are r1 = r2 = 0.
     (c) Show that one solution for x > 0 is
                                                        ∞
                                                            (−1)n x2n
                                         J0 (x) = 1 +                  .
                                                        n=1
                                                             22n (n!)2
     (d) Show that the series for J0 (x) converges for all x. The function J0 is known as the
     Bessel function of the first kind of order zero.
15. Referring to Problem 14, use the method of reduction of order to show that the second
     solution of the Bessel equation of order zero contains a logarithmic term.
     Hint: If y2 (x) = J0 (x)v(x), then
                                                         
                                                                dx
                                         y2 (x) = J0 (x)               .
                                                            x[J0 (x)]2
     Find the first term in the series expansion of 1/x[J0 (x)]2 .
16. The Bessel equation of order one is
                                        x2 y + xy + (x2 − 1)y = 0.
     (a) Show that x = 0 is a regular singular point.
     (b) Show that the roots of the indicial equation are r1 = 1 and r2 = −1.
13 Edmond Nicolas Laguerre (1834–1886), a French geometer and analyst, studied the polynomials named
for him about 1879. He is also known for an algorithm for calculating roots of polynomial equations.
                   (c) Show that one solution for x > 0 is
                                                              x  (−1)n x2n
                                                                  ∞
                                                  J1 (x) =                             .
                                                              2 n=0 (n + 1)! n! 22n
                   (d) Show that the series for J1 (x) converges for all x. The function J1 is known as the
                   Bessel function of the first kind of order one.
                   (e) Show that it is impossible to determine a second solution of the form
                                                           ∞
                                                      x−1        bn x n ,     x > 0.
                                                           n=0
5.6 Series Solutions Near a Regular Singular Point, Part II
                Now let us consider the general problem of determining a solution of the equation
                                        L[y] = x2 y + x[xp(x)]y + [x2 q(x)]y = 0,                       (1)
                where
                                                 ∞                                 ∞
                                        xp(x) =        pn x n ,         x2 q(x) =        qn x n ,          (2)
                                                 n=0                                n=0
                and both series converge in an interval |x| < ρ for some ρ > 0. The point x = 0 is a
                regular singular point, and the corresponding Euler equation is
                                                 x2 y + p0 xy + q0 y = 0.                               (3)
                We seek a solution of Eq. (1) for x > 0 and assume that it has the form
                                                                ∞              ∞
                                         y = φ(r, x) = xr            an x n =       an xr+n ,              (4)
                                                                n=0             n=0
                where a0  = 0, and we have written y = φ(r, x) to emphasize that φ depends on r as
                well as x. It follows that
                                ∞                                       ∞
                          y =      (r + n)an xr+n−1 ,         y =         (r + n)(r + n − 1)an xr+n−2 . (5)
                                n=0                                      n=0
                Then, substituting from Eqs. (2), (4), and (5) in Eq. (1) gives
                      a0 r(r − 1)xr + a1 (r + 1)rxr+1 + · · · + an (r + n)(r + n − 1)xr+n + · · ·
                                     + (p0 + p1 x + · · · + pn xn + · · ·)
                                             × [a0 rxr + a1 (r + 1)xr+1 + · · · + an (r + n)xr+n + · · ·]
                                     + (q0 + q1 x + · · · + qn xn + · · ·)
                                             × (a0 xr + a1 xr+1 + · · · + an xr+n + · · ·) = 0.
Multiplying the infinite series together and then collecting terms, we obtain
            a0 F(r)xr + [a1 F(r + 1) + a0 (p1 r + q1 )]xr+1
                               "                                                     #
                            + a2 F(r + 2) + a0 (p2 r + q2 ) + a1 [p1 (r + 1) + q1 ] xr+2
                                       "
                            + · · · + an F(r + n) + a0 (pn r + qn ) + a1 [pn−1 (r + 1) + qn−1 ]
                                                                     #
                            + · · · + an−1 [p1 (r + n − 1) + q1 ] xr+n + · · · = 0,
or, in a more compact form,
          L[φ](r, x) = a0 F(r)xr
                                     ∞
                                                                                      $
                                                         
                                                          n−1
                               +          F(r + n)an +         ak [(r + k)pn−k + qn−k ] xr+n = 0, (6)
                                    n=1                   k=0
where
                                            F(r) = r(r − 1) + p0 r + q0 .                         (7)
For Eq. (6) to be satisfied for all x > 0, the coefficient of each power of x must be
zero.
   Since a0  = 0, the term involving xr yields the equation F(r) = 0. This equation is
called the indicial equation; note that it is exactly the equation we would obtain in
looking for solutions y = xr of the Euler equation (3). Let us denote the roots of
the indicial equation by r1 and r2 with r1 ≥ r2 if the roots are real. If the roots are
complex, the designation of the roots is immaterial. Only for these values of r can
we expect to find solutions of Eq. (1) of the form (4). The roots r1 and r2 are called
the exponents at the singularity; they determine the qualitative nature of the solution
in the neighborhood of the singular point.
   Setting the coefficient of xr+n in Eq. (6) equal to zero gives the recurrence relation
                                          n−1
                        F(r + n)an +           ak [(r + k)pn−k + qn−k ] = 0,       n ≥ 1.         (8)
                                          k=0
Equation (8) shows that, in general, an depends on the value of r and all the pre-
ceding coefficients a0 , a1 , . . . , an−1 . It also shows that we can successively compute
a1 , a2 , . . . , an , . . . in terms of a0 and the coefficients in the series for xp(x) and x2 q(x),
provided that F(r + 1), F(r + 2), . . . , F(r + n), . . . are not zero. The only values of r
for which F(r) = 0 are r = r1 and r = r2 ; since r1 ≥ r2 , it follows that r1 + n is not
equal to r1 or r2 for n ≥ 1. Consequently, F(r1 + n)  = 0 for n ≥ 1. Hence we can
always determine one solution of Eq. (1) in the form (4), namely,
                                                        ∞
                                                                       
                                                       
                                  y1 (x) = x  r1
                                                  1+       an (r1 )x n
                                                                         ,  x > 0.                (9)
                                                       n=1
Here we have introduced the notation an (r1 ) to indicate that an has been determined
from Eq. (8) with r = r1 . To specify the arbitrary constant in the solution, we have
taken a0 to be 1.
   If r2 is not equal to r1 , and r1 − r2 is not a positive integer, then r2 + n is not equal
to r1 for any value of n ≥ 1; hence F(r2 + n)  = 0, and we can also obtain a second
solution
                                              ∞
                                                            
                                             
                         y2 (x) = x 1 +
                                    r2
                                                 an (r2 )x ,
                                                          n
                                                                 x > 0.                  (10)
                                             n=1
   Just as for the series solutions about ordinary points discussed in Section 5.3, the
series in Eqs. (9) and (10) converge at least in the interval |x| < ρ where the series for
both xp(x) and x2 q(x) converge. Within their radii of convergence, the power series
      
      ∞                       
                              ∞
1+        an (r1 )xn and 1 +     an (r2 )xn define functions that are analytic at x = 0. Thus
     n=1                     n=1
the singular behavior, if there is any, of the solutions y1 and y2 is due to the factors
xr1 and xr2 that multiply these two analytic functions. Next, to obtain real-valued
solutions for x < 0, we can make the substitution x = −ξ with ξ > 0. As we might
expect from our discussion of the Euler equation, it turns out that we need only
replace xr1 in Eq. (9) and xr2 in Eq. (10) by |x|r1 and |x|r2 , respectively. Finally, note
that if r1 and r2 are complex numbers, then they are necessarily complex conjugates
and r2  = r1 + N for any positive integer N. Thus, in this case we can always find two
series solutions of the form (4); however, they are complex-valued functions of x.
Real-valued solutions can be obtained by taking the real and imaginary parts of
the complex-valued solutions. The exceptional cases in which r1 = r2 or r1 − r2 = N,
where N is a positive integer, require more discussion and will be considered later in
this section.
   It is important to realize that r1 and r2 , the exponents at the singular point, are easy
to find and that they determine the qualitative behavior of the solutions. To calculate
r1 and r2 , it is only necessary to solve the quadratic indicial equation
                                    r(r − 1) + p0 r + q0 = 0,                            (11)
whose coefficients are given by
                             p0 = lim xp(x),        q0 = lim x2 q(x).                    (12)
                                  x→0                      x→0
Note that these are exactly the limits that must be evaluated in order to classify the
singularity as a regular singular point; thus they have usually been determined at an
earlier stage of the investigation.
   Further, if x = 0 is a regular singular point of the equation
                                P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0,                            (13)
where the functions P, Q, and R are polynomials, then xp(x) = xQ(x)/P(x) and
x2 q(x) = x2 R(x)/P(x). Thus
                                         Q(x)                   R(x)
                           p0 = lim x         ,     q0 = lim x2       .                  (14)
                                 x→0     P(x)               x→0 P(x)
Finally, the radii of convergence for the series in Eqs. (9) and (10) are at least equal
to the distance from the origin to the nearest zero of P other than x = 0 itself.
        Discuss the nature of the solutions of the equation
EXAMPLE
                                             2x(1 + x)y + (3 + x)y − xy = 0
   1
        near the singular points.
           This equation is of the form (13) with P(x) = 2x(1 + x), Q(x) = 3 + x, and R(x) = −x. The
        points x = 0 and x = −1 are the only singular points. The point x = 0 is a regular singular
        point, since
                                                   Q(x)              3+x          3
                                            lim x        = lim x                = ,
                                            x→0    P(x)    x→0    2x(1 + x)       2
                                                   R(x)                −x
                                           lim x2        = lim x2                = 0.
                                           x→0     P(x)    x→0     2x(1 + x)
        Further, from Eq. (14), p0 = 23 and q0 = 0. Thus the indicial equation is r(r − 1) + 23 r = 0, and
        the roots are r1 = 0, r2 = − 21 . Since these roots are not equal and do not differ by an integer,
        there are two solutions of the form
                                                                                                    
                                      ∞                                               ∞
                                                                                              1 n
                                                                           −1/2
                       y1 (x) = 1 +        an (0)x and y2 (x) = |x|
                                                   n
                                                                                  1+       an − 2 x
                                      n=1                                              n=1
        for 0 < |x| < ρ. A lower bound for the radius of convergence of each series is 1, the distance
        from x = 0 to x = −1, the other zero of P(x). Note that the solution y1 is bounded as x → 0,
        indeed is analytic there, and that the second solution y2 is unbounded as x → 0.
           The point x = −1 is also a regular singular point, since
                                                    Q(x)          (x + 1)(3 + x)
                                    lim (x + 1)          = lim                       = −1,
                                   x→−1             P(x)    x→−1     2x(1 + x)
                                                    R(x)          (x + 1)2 (−x)
                                   lim (x + 1)2          = lim                     = 0.
                                  x→−1              P(x) x→−1 2x(1 + x)
        In this case p0 = −1, q0 = 0, so the indicial equation is r(r − 1) − r = 0. The roots of the indicial
        equation are r1 = 2 and r2 = 0. Corresponding to the larger root there is a solution of the form
                                                                                       
                                                                 ∞
                                       y1 (x) = (x + 1) 1 +
                                                         2
                                                                      an (2)(x + 1) .n
                                                                 n=1
        The series converges at least for |x + 1| < 1, and y1 is an analytic function there. Since the two
        roots differ by a positive integer, there may or may not be a second solution of the form
                                                             ∞
                                               y2 (x) = 1 +      an (0)(x + 1)n .
                                                             n=1
        We cannot say more without further analysis.
           Observe that no complicated calculations were required to discover the information about
        the solutions presented in this example. All that was needed was to evaluate a few limits and
        solve two quadratic equations.
           We now consider the cases in which the roots of the indicial equation are equal or
        differ by a positive integer, r1 − r2 = N. As we have shown earlier, there is always one
        solution of the form (9) corresponding to the larger root r1 of the indicial equation.
        By analogy with the Euler equation, we might expect that if r1 = r2 , then the second
        solution contains a logarithmic term. This may also be true if the roots differ by an
        integer.
Equal Roots. The method of finding the second solution is essentially the same as the
one we used in finding the second solution of the Euler equation (see Section 5.4)
when the roots of the indicial equation were equal. We consider r to be a continuous
variable and determine an as a function of r by solving the recurrence relation (8).
For this choice of an (r) for n ≥ 1, the terms in Eq. (6) involving xr+1 , xr+2 , xr+3 , . . . all
have coefficients equal to zero. Therefore, Eq. (6) reduces to
                              L[φ](r, x) = a0 F(r)xr = a0 (r − r1 )2 xr ,                               (15)
since r1 is a repeated root of F(r). Setting r = r1 in Eq. (15), we find that
L[φ](r1 , x) = 0; hence, as we already know, y1 (x) given by Eq. (9) is one solution
of Eq. (1). But more important, it also follows from Eq. (15), just as for the Euler
equation, that
                                                            
                     ∂φ                    ∂                  
                 L        (r1 , x) = a0 [xr (r − r1 )2 ]
                     ∂r                   ∂r                    r=r1
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                     = a0 [(r − r1 )2 xr ln x + 2(r − r1 )xr ]           = 0.          (16)
                                                                                     r=r1
Hence, a second solution of Eq. (1) is
                                                                         $ 
                   ∂φ(r, x)            ∂                 ∞                   
                                                                                
         y2 (x) =                    =       x a0 +
                                                r
                                                                an (r)x  n
                                                                                
                       ∂r              ∂r                                      
                                r=r1                       n=1                   r=r1
                                                              ∞
                                                                                         ∞
                                                                                       
                                      = (xr1 ln x) a0 +           an (r1 )xn + xr1          an (r1 )xn
                                                             n=1                        n=1
                                                            ∞
                                      = y1 (x) ln x + xr1         an (r1 )xn ,       x > 0,            (17)
                                                            n=1
where an (r1 ) denotes dan /dr evaluated at r = r1 .
   Although Eq. (17) provides an explicit expression for a second solution y2 (x), it
may turn out that it is difficult to determine an (r) as a function of r from the recur-
rence relation (8) and then to differentiate the resulting expression with respect to r.
An alternative is simply to assume that y has the form of Eq. (17). That is, assume that
                                                      ∞
                            y = y1 (x) ln x + xr1           bn x n ,       x > 0,                       (18)
                                                      n=1
where y1 (x) has already been found. The coefficients bn are calculated, as usual, by
substituting into the differential equation, collecting terms, and setting the coeffi-
cient of each power of x equal to zero. A third possibility is to use the method of
reduction of order to find y2 (x) once y1 (x) is known.
Roots r 1 and r 2 Differing by an Integer N. For this case the derivation of the second solu-
tion is considerably more complicated and will not be given here. The form of this
solution is stated in Eq. (24) in the following theorem. The coefficients cn (r2 ) in
Eq. (24) are given by
                                                         
                                     d                   
                      cn (r2 ) = [(r − r2 )an (r)] ,                   n = 1, 2, . . . ,               (19)
                                   dr                     r=r2
              where an (r) is determined from the recurrence relation (8) with a0 = 1. Further, the
              coefficient a in Eq. (24) is
                                                   a = lim (r − r2 )aN (r).                          (20)
                                                        r→r2
              If aN (r2 ) is finite, then a = 0 and there is no logarithmic term in y2 . A full derivation
              of formulas (19) and (20) may be found in Coddington (Chapter 4).
                 In practice, the best way to determine whether a is zero in the second solution
              is simply to try to compute the an corresponding to the root r2 and to see whether it is
              possible to determine aN (r2 ). If so, there is no further problem. If not, we must use
              the form (24) with a  = 0.
                 When r1 − r2 = N, there are again three ways to find a second solution. First, we
              can calculate a and cn (r2 ) directly by substituting the expression (24) for y in Eq. (1).
              Second, we can calculate cn (r2 ) and a of Eq. (24) using the formulas (19) and (20).
              If this is the planned procedure, then in calculating the solution corresponding to
              r = r1 , be sure to obtain the general formula for an (r) rather than just an (r1 ). The
              third alternative is to use the method of reduction of order.
                 The following theorem summarizes the results that we have obtained in this section.
Theorem 5.6.1 Consider the differential equation (1)
                                           x2 y + x[xp(x)]y + [x2 q(x)]y = 0,
              where x = 0 is a regular singular point. Then xp(x) and x2 q(x) are analytic at x = 0
              with convergent power series expansions
                                                  ∞                        ∞
                                        xp(x) =            n
                                                      pn x ,    x q(x) =
                                                                  2
                                                                                 qn x n
                                                  n=0                       n=0
              for |x| < ρ, where ρ > 0 is the minimum of the radii of convergence of the power
              series for xp(x) and x2 q(x). Let r1 and r2 be the roots of the indicial equation
                                            F(r) = r(r − 1) + p0 r + q0 = 0,
              with r1 ≥ r2 if r1 and r2 are real. Then in either the interval −ρ < x < 0 or the interval
              0 < x < ρ, there exists a solution of the form
                                                                 ∞
                                                                               
                                                                
                                            y1 (x) = |x| 1 +
                                                         r1
                                                                    an (r1 )x ,
                                                                             n
                                                                                                    (21)
                                                                n=1
              where the an (r1 ) are given by the recurrence relation (8) with a0 = 1 and r = r1 .
                  If r1 − r2 is not zero or a positive integer, then in either the interval −ρ < x < 0
              or the interval 0 < x < ρ, there exists a second solution of the form
                                                                 ∞
                                                                               
                                                                
                                            y2 (x) = |x| 1 +
                                                         r2
                                                                    an (r2 )x .
                                                                             n
                                                                                                    (22)
                                                                n=1
         The an (r2 ) are also determined by the recurrence relation (8) with a0 = 1 and
         r = r2 . The power series in Eqs. (21) and (22) converge at least for |x| < ρ.
             If r1 = r2 , then the second solution is
                                                                         ∞
                                        y2 (x) = y1 (x) ln |x| + |x|r1       bn (r1 )xn .                  (23)
                                                                         n=1
             If r1 − r2 = N, a positive integer, then
                                                                             ∞
                                                                                            
                                                                            
                                   y2 (x) = ay1 (x) ln |x| + |x| r2
                                                                        1+      cn (r2 )x n
                                                                                              .            (24)
                                                                            n=1
         The coefficients an (r1 ), bn (r1 ), and cn (r2 ) and the constant a can be determined by
         substituting the form of the series solutions for y in Eq. (1). The constant a may
         turn out to be zero, in which case there is no logarithmic term in the solution (24).
         Each of the series in Eqs. (23) and (24) converges at least for |x| < ρ and defines a
         function that is analytic in some neighborhood of x = 0.
             In all three cases, the two solutions y1 (x) and y2 (x) form a fundamental set of
         solutions of the given differential equation.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 12:
         (a) Find all the regular singular points of the given differential equation.
         (b) Determine the indicial equation and the exponents at the singularity for each regular
         singular point.
           1. xy + 2xy + 6ex y = 0                            2. x2 y − x(2 + x)y + (2 + x2 )y = 0
                                2 
           3. x(x − 1)y + 6x y + 3y = 0                          4. y + 4xy + 6y = 0
           5. x2 y + 3(sin x)y − 2y = 0                       6. 2x(x + 2)y + y − xy = 0
                2 
           7. x y    + 21 (x + sin x)y + y = 0                  8. (x + 1)2 y + 3(x2 − 1)y + 3y = 0
                                        
           9. x2 (1 − x)y − (1 + x)y + 2xy = 0                  10. (x − 2)2 (x + 2)y + 2xy + 3(x − 2)y = 0
                                 
         11. (4 − x )y + 2xy + 3y = 0
                      2
                                                                12. x(x + 3)2 y − 2(x + 3)y − xy = 0
         In each of Problems 13 through 17:
         (a) Show that x = 0 is a regular singular point of the given differential equation.
         (b) Find the exponents at the singular point x = 0.
         (c) Find the first three nonzero terms in each of two solutions (not multiples of each other)
         about x = 0.
         13. xy + y − y = 0
         14. xy + 2xy + 6ex y = 0;          see Problem 1
                                2 
         15. x(x − 1)y + 6x y + 3y = 0;              see Problem 3
         16. xy + y = 0
         17. x2 y + (sin x)y − (cos x)y = 0
         18. (a) Show that
                                                      (ln x)y + 21 y + y = 0
              has a regular singular point at x = 1.
    (b) Determine the roots of the indicial equation at x = 1.
                                                                       
                                                                       ∞
    (c) Determine the first three nonzero terms in the series               an (x − 1)r+n corresponding
    to the larger root. Take x − 1 > 0.                               n=0
    (d) What would you expect the radius of convergence of the series to be?
19. In several problems in mathematical physics, it is necessary to study the differential
    equation
                            x(1 − x)y + [γ − (1 + α + β)x]y − αβy = 0,                            (i)
    where α, β, and γ are constants. This equation is known as the hypergeometric equation.
    (a) Show that x = 0 is a regular singular point and that the roots of the indicial equation
    are 0 and 1 − γ.
    (b) Show that x = 1 is a regular singular point and that the roots of the indicial equation
    are 0 and γ − α − β.
    (c) Assuming that 1 − γ is not a positive integer, show that, in the neighborhood of x = 0,
    one solution of Eq. (i) is
                                         αβ           α(α + 1)β(β + 1) 2
                          y1 (x) = 1 +           x+                     x + ···.
                                        γ · 1!           γ(γ + 1)2!
    What would you expect the radius of convergence of this series to be?
    (d) Assuming that 1 − γ is not an integer or zero, show that a second solution for
    0 < x < 1 is
                              
                                    (α − γ + 1)(β − γ + 1)
                y2 (x) = x1−γ 1 +                              x
                                             (2 − γ)1!
                                                                                          
                            (α − γ + 1)(α − γ + 2)(β − γ + 1)(β − γ + 2) 2
                         +                                                         x + ··· .
                                               (2 − γ)(3 − γ)2!
    (e) Show that the point at infinity is a regular singular point and that the roots of the
    indicial equation are α and β. See Problem 43 of Section 5.4.
20. Consider the differential equation
                                         x3 y + αxy + βy = 0,
    where α and β are real constants and α  = 0.
    (a) Show that x = 0 is an irregular singular point.
                                                                    ∞
    (b) By attempting to determine a solution of the form               an xr+n , show that the indicial
                                                                    n=0
    equation for r is linear and that, consequently, there is only one formal solution of the
    assumed form.
    (c) Show that if β/α = −1, 0, 1, 2, . . . , then the formal series solution terminates and there-
    fore is an actual solution. For other values of β/α, show that the formal series solution has
    a zero radius of convergence and so does not represent an actual solution in any interval.
21. Consider the differential equation
                                                  α      β
                                         y +       y + t y = 0,                                    (i)
                                                  xs      x
    where α = 0 and β  = 0 are real numbers, and s and t are positive integers that for the
    moment are arbitrary.
                      (a) Show that if s > 1 or t > 2, then the point x = 0 is an irregular singular point.
                      (b) Try to find a solution of Eq. (i) of the form
                                                                ∞
                                                            y=      an xr+n ,     x > 0.                                  (ii)
                                                                n=0
                      Show that if s = 2 and t = 2, then there is only one possible value of r for which there is a
                      formal solution of Eq. (i) of the form (ii).
                      (c) Show that if s = 1 and t = 3, then there are no solutions of Eq. (i) of the form (ii).
                      (d) Show that the maximum values of s and t for which the indicial equation is quadratic in
                      r [and hence we can hope to find two solutions of the form (ii)] are s = 1 and t = 2. These
                      are precisely the conditions that distinguish a “weak singularity,” or a regular singular
                      point, from an irregular singular point, as we defined them in Section 5.4.
                      As a note of caution, we point out that although it is sometimes possible to obtain a formal
                      series solution of the form (ii) at an irregular singular point, the series may not have a
                      positive radius of convergence. See Problem 20 for an example.
5.7 Bessel’s Equation
                In this section we illustrate the discussion in Section 5.6 by considering three special
                cases of Bessel’s14 equation,
                                                      x2 y + xy + (x2 − ν2 )y = 0,                                     (1)
                where ν is a constant. It is easy to show that x = 0 is a regular singular point of Eq. (1).
               We have
                                                             Q(x)             1
                                               p0 = lim x          = lim x = 1,
                                                     x→0 P(x)         x→0 x
                                                             R(x)              x2 − ν 2
                                              q0 = lim x2          = lim x2              = −ν2 .
                                                    x→0      P(x) x→0             x2
               Thus the indicial equation is
                               F(r) = r(r − 1) + p0 r + q0 = r(r − 1) + r − ν2 = r 2 − ν2 = 0,
                with the roots r = ±ν. We will consider the three cases ν = 0, ν = 21 , and ν = 1 for
                the interval x > 0.
                Bessel Equation of Order Zero. In this case ν = 0, so Eq. (1) reduces to
                                                     L[y] = x2 y + xy + x2 y = 0,                                      (2)
                14 Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel (1784–1846) left school at the age of 14 to embark on a career in the import-
                export business but soon became interested in astronomy and mathematics. He was appointed director
                of the observatory at Königsberg in 1810 and held this position until his death. His study of planetary
                perturbations led him in 1824 to make the first systematic analysis of the solutions, known as Bessel
                functions, of Eq. (1). He is also famous for making, in 1838, the first accurate determination of the distance
                from the earth to a star.
and the roots of the indicial equation are equal: r1 = r2 = 0. Substituting
                                                          ∞
                                y = φ(r, x) = a0 xr +         an xr+n                        (3)
                                                          n=1
in Eq. (2), we obtain
                       ∞                                                     ∞
         L[φ](r, x) =       an [(r + n)(r + n − 1) + (r + n)]xr+n +                an xr+n+2
                       n=0                                                    n=0
                     = a0 [r(r − 1) + r]x + a1 [(r + 1)r + (r + 1)]xr+1
                                             r
                           ∞
                                "                                                  #
                       +          an [(r + n)(r + n − 1) + (r + n)] + an−2 xr+n = 0.         (4)
                           n=2
As we have already noted, the roots of the indicial equation F(r) = r(r − 1) + r = 0
are r1 = 0 and r2 = 0. The recurrence relation is
                                      an−2 (r)                     an−2 (r)
            an (r) = −                                      =−               ,       n ≥ 2.  (5)
                        (r + n)(r + n − 1) + (r + n)              (r + n)2
  To determine y1 (x), we set r equal to 0. Then, from Eq. (4), it follows that for
the coefficient of xr+1 to be zero we must choose a1 = 0. Hence, from Eq. (5),
a3 = a5 = a7 = · · · = 0. Further,
                        an (0) = −an−2 (0)/n2 ,          n = 2, 4, 6, 8, . . . ,
or, letting n = 2m, we obtain
                     a2m (0) = −a2m−2 (0)/(2m)2 ,            m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
Thus
                            a0                     a0                            a0
                a2 (0) = − 2 ,          a4 (0) =       ,      a6 (0) = − 6              ,
                            2                    24 22                     2 (3 · 2)2
and, in general,
                                        (−1)m a0
                          a2m (0) =               ,      m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .                (6)
                                        22m (m!)2
Hence
                                               ∞
                                                             
                                                (−1)m x2m
                       y1 (x) = a0 1 +                          ,     x > 0.                 (7)
                                                  22m (m!)2
                                             m=1
The function in brackets is known as the Bessel function of the first kind of order
zero and is denoted by J0 (x). It follows from Theorem 5.6.1 that the series converges
for all x and that J0 is analytic at x = 0. Some of the important properties of J0 are
discussed in the problems. Figure 5.7.1 shows the graphs of y = J0 (x) and some of
the partial sums of the series (7).
                       y
                                              n = 4 n = 8 n = 12          n = 16 n = 20
                       2
                       1
                                     2          4           6            8          10    x
                                                                                 y = J0(x)
                      –1
                                       n=2      n=6       n = 10     n = 14    n = 18
   FIGURE 5.7.1 Polynomial approximations to J0 (x), the Bessel function of the first kind
          of order zero. The value of n is the degree of the approximating polynomial.
    To determine y2 (x), we will calculate15 an (0). First we note from the coefficient of
x r+1
       in Eq. (4) that (r + 1)2 a1 (r) = 0. Thus a1 (r) = 0 for all r near r = 0. So not
only does a1 (0) = 0 but also a1 (0) = 0. From the recurrence relation (5) it fol-
lows that a3 (0) = a5 (0) = · · · = a2n+1 (0) = · · · = 0; hence we need only compute
a2m (0), m = 1, 2, 3, . . . . From Eq. (5) we have
                     a2m (r) = −a2m−2 (r)/(r + 2m)2 ,                m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
By solving this recurrence relation, we obtain
                                         a0                                a0
                       a2 (r) = −             ,       a4 (r) =                        ,
                                     (r + 2)2                    (r + 2)2 (r + 4)2
and, in general,
                                               (−1)m a0
                           a2m (r) =                               ,       m ≥ 3.                      (8)
                                       (r + 2)2 · · · (r + 2m)2
    The computation of a2m (r) can be carried out most conveniently by noting that if
                     f (x) = (x − α1 )β1 (x − α2 )β2 (x − α3 )β3 · · · (x − αn )βn ,
and if x is not equal to α1 , α2 , . . . , αn , then
                             f  (x)      β1           β2                   βn
                                     =          +            + ··· +             .
                             f (x)      x − α1     x − α2               x − αn
Applying this result to a2m (r) from Eq. (8), we find that
                                          
                        a2m (r)             1           1                    1
                                   = −2           +           + ··· +                ,
                        a2m (r)             r+2 r+4                       r + 2m
15 Problem 10 outlines an alternative procedure, in which we simply substitute the form (23) of Section 5.6
in Eq. (2) and then determine the bn .
and setting r equal to 0, we obtain
                                                                     
                                               1 1                1
                            a2m (0) = −2        + + ··· +               a2m (0).
                                               2 4               2m
Substituting for a2m (0) from Eq. (6), and letting
                                                   1 1                1
                                    Hm = 1 +         + + ··· + ,                                        (9)
                                                   2 3               m
we obtain, finally,
                                             (−1)m a0
                         a2m (0) = −Hm 2m              ,      m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
                                             2 (m!)2
The second solution of the Bessel equation of order zero is found by setting a0 = 1
and substituting for y1 (x) and a2m (0) = b2m (0) in Eq. (23) of Section 5.6. We obtain
                                               ∞
                                                    (−1)m+1 Hm
                     y2 (x) = J0 (x) ln x +                        x2m ,        x > 0.                (10)
                                                      22m (m!)2
                                               m=1
    Instead of y2 , the second solution is usually taken to be a certain linear combination
of J0 and y2 . It is known as the Bessel function of the second kind of order zero
and is denoted by Y0 . Following Copson (Chapter 12), we define16
                                           2
                                Y0 (x) =      [y2 (x) + (γ − ln 2)J0 (x)].                            (11)
                                           π
Here γ is a constant known as the Euler–Máscheroni17 constant; it is defined by the
equation
                                   γ = lim (Hn − ln n) ∼     = 0.5772.                                (12)
                                        n→∞
Substituting for y2 (x) in Eq. (11), we obtain
                                                      ∞
                                                                               
                        2              x                 (−1)m+1 Hm 2m
            Y0 (x) =           γ + ln      J0 (x) +                        x     ,     x > 0.         (13)
                        π              2             m=1
                                                            22m (m!)2
The general solution of the Bessel equation of order zero for x > 0 is
                                        y = c1 J0 (x) + c2 Y0 (x).
    Note that J0 (x) → 1 as x → 0 and that Y0 (x) has a logarithmic singularity at x = 0;
that is, Y0 (x) behaves as (2/π) ln x when x → 0 through positive values. Thus, if we
are interested in solutions of Bessel’s equation of order zero that are finite at the
origin, which is often the case, we must discard Y0 . The graphs of the functions J0 and
Y0 are shown in Figure 5.7.2.
16 Other authors use other definitions for Y . The present choice for Y is also known as the Weber function,
                                           0                           0
after Heinrich Weber (1842–1913), who taught at several German universities.
17The Euler-Máscheroni constant first appeared in 1734 in a paper by Euler. Lorenzo Máscheroni
(1750–1800) was an Italian priest and professor at the University of Pavia. He correctly calculated the first
19 decimal places of γ in 1790.
                      y
                      1
                             y = J0(x)
                    0.5               y = Y0(x)
                               2        4       6     8   10    12   14   x
                   –0.5
                FIGURE 5.7.2 The Bessel functions of order zero: J0 and Y0 .
   It is interesting to note from Figure 5.7.2 that for x large, both J0 (x) and Y0 (x) are
oscillatory. Such a behavior might be anticipated from the original equation; indeed
it is true for the solutions of the Bessel equation of order ν. If we divide Eq. (1) by
x2 , we obtain
                                                 
                                         1             ν2
                                  y + y + 1 − 2 y = 0.
                                         x             x
For x very large, it is reasonable to conjecture that the terms (1/x)y and (ν2 /x2 )y are
small and hence can be neglected. If this is true, then the Bessel equation of order ν
can be approximated by
                                             y + y = 0.
The solutions of this equation are sin x and cos x; thus we might anticipate that the
solutions of Bessel’s equation for large x are similar to linear combinations of sin x
and cos x. This is correct insofar as the Bessel functions are oscillatory; however, it is
only partly correct. For x large the functions J0 and Y0 also decay as x increases; thus
the equation y + y = 0 does not provide an adequate approximation to the Bessel
equation for large x, and a more delicate analysis is required. In fact, it is possible to
show that
                                        1/2
                                   2                   π
                      J0 (x) ∼
                             =               cos x −         as  x→∞                   (14)
                                  πx                   4
and that
                                        1/2
                                    2                 π
                     Y0 (x) ∼=               sin x −         as  x → ∞.                (15)
                                   πx                  4
These asymptotic approximations, as x → ∞, are actually very good. For example,
Figure 5.7.3 shows that the asymptotic approximation (14) to J0 (x) is reasonably
accurate for all x ≥ 1. Thus to approximate J0 (x) over the entire range from zero to
infinity, you can use two or three terms of the series (7) for x ≤ 1 and the asymptotic
approximation (14) for x ≥ 1.
                    y
                    2
                                                                  1/2
                            Asymptotic approximation: y = (2/π x)      cos(x – π /4)
                    1
                                                                y = J0(x)
                                                                                      x
                   –1
                    FIGURE 5.7.3 Asymptotic approximation to J0 (x).
Bessel Equation of Order One-Half. This case illustrates the situation in which the roots
of the indicial equation differ by a positive integer but there is no logarithmic term
in the second solution. Setting ν = 21 in Eq. (1) gives
                                                             
                             L[y] = x2 y + xy + x2 − 14 y = 0.                               (16)
When we substitute the series (3) for y = φ(r, x), we obtain
                      ∞                                                          ∞
                                                                  
       L[φ](r, x) =         (r + n)(r + n − 1) + (r + n) − 14 an xr+n +               an xr+n+2
                      n=0                                                         n=0
                                                      
                   = r 2 − 14 a0 xr + (r + 1)2 − 14 a1 xr+1
                        ∞
                              "                          #
                      +          (r + n)2 − 14 an + an−2 xr+n = 0.                              (17)
                        n=2
The roots of the indicial equation are r1 = 21 , r2 = − 21 ; hence the roots differ by an
integer. The recurrence relation is
                                          
                             (r + n)2 − 14 an = −an−2 ,           n ≥ 2.                        (18)
Corresponding to the larger root r1 = 21 , we find, from the coefficient of xr+1 in
Eq. (17), that a1 = 0. Hence, from Eq. (18), a3 = a5 = · · · = a2n+1 = · · · = 0. Fur-
ther, for r = 21 ,
                                        an−2
                             an = −              ,      n = 2, 4, 6 . . . ,
                                      n(n + 1)
or, letting n = 2m, we obtain
                                       a2m−2
                        a2m = −                    ,      m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
                                    2m(2m + 1)
By solving this recurrence relation, we find that
                                           a0              a0
                                   a2 = −     ,      a4 =     ,...
                                           3!              5!
and, in general,
                                     (−1)m a0
                          a2m =                 ,      m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
                                    (2m + 1)!
Hence, taking a0 = 1, we obtain
                           ∞
                                                        ∞
                              (−1)m x2m                    (−1)m x2m+1
      y1 (x) = x 1/2
                      1+                       = x−1/2                      ,       x > 0. (19)
                               (2m + 1)!                       (2m + 1)!
                          m=1                           m=0
The second power series in Eq. (19) is precisely the Taylor series for sin x; hence one
solution of the Bessel equation of order one-half is x−1/2 sin x. The Bessel function
of the first kind of order one-half, J1/2 , is defined as (2/π)1/2 y1 . Thus
                                         
                                            2 1/2
                            J1/2 (x) =              sin x,      x > 0.                     (20)
                                           πx
   Corresponding to the root r2 = − 21 , it is possible that we may have difficulty in
computing a1 since N = r1 − r2 = 1. However, from Eq. (17) for r = − 21 , the coeffi-
cients of xr and xr+1 are both zero regardless of the choice of a0 and a1 . Hence a0
and a1 can be chosen arbitrarily. From the recurrence relation (18), we obtain a set
of even-numbered coefficients corresponding to a0 and a set of odd-numbered coef-
ficients corresponding to a1 . Thus no logarithmic term is needed to obtain a second
solution in this case. It is left as an exercise to show that, for r = − 21 ,
                        (−1)n a0                    (−1)n a1
                a2n =             ,      a2n+1 =              ,      n = 1, 2, . . . .
                         (2n)!                     (2n + 1)!
Hence
                                         ∞                     ∞
                                                                                
                                            (−1)n x2n           (−1)n x2n+1
                             −1/2
                  y2 (x) = x         a0                 + a1
                                               (2n)!               (2n + 1)!
                                        n=0                   n=0
                              cos x         sin x
                         = a0    1/2
                                      + a1 1/2 ,        x > 0.                             (21)
                               x            x
The constant a1 simply introduces a multiple of y1 (x). The second solution of the
Bessel equation of order one-half is usually taken to be the solution for which
a0 = (2/π)1/2 and a1 = 0. It is denoted by J−1/2 . Then
                                         
                                             2 1/2
                           J−1/2 (x) =               cos x,      x > 0.                    (22)
                                            πx
The general solution of Eq. (16) is y = c1 J1/2 (x) + c2 J−1/2 (x).
   By comparing Eqs. (20) and (22) with Eqs. (14) and (15), we see that, except for a
phase shift of π/4, the functions J−1/2 and J1/2 resemble J0 and Y0 , respectively, for
large x. The graphs of J1/2 and J−1/2 are shown in Figure 5.7.4.
Bessel Equation of Order One. This case illustrates the situation in which the roots of
the indicial equation differ by a positive integer and the second solution involves a
logarithmic term. Setting ν = 1 in Eq. (1) gives
                            L[y] = x2 y + xy + (x2 − 1)y = 0.                           (23)
                   y
                    1
                         J–1/2(x)
                  0.5            J1/2(x)
                              2       4       6      8      10      12      14  x
                 –0.5
                   FIGURE 5.7.4 The Bessel functions J1/2 and J−1/2 .
If we substitute the series (3) for y = φ(r, x) and collect terms as in the preceding
cases, we obtain
               L[φ](r, x) = a0 (r 2 − 1)xr + a1 [(r + 1)2 − 1]xr+1
                                  ∞ %                                   &
                                                        
                               +           (r + n)2 − 1 an + an−2 xr+n = 0.               (24)
                                  n=2
The roots of the indicial equation are r1 = 1 and r2 = −1. The recurrence relation is
                       [(r + n)2 − 1]an (r) = −an−2 (r),             n ≥ 2.               (25)
Corresponding to the larger root r = 1, the recurrence relation becomes
                                       an−2
                           an = −               ,      n = 2, 3, 4, . . . .
                                     (n + 2)n
We also find, from the coefficient of xr+1 in Eq. (24), that a1 = 0; hence, from the
recurrence relation, a3 = a5 = · · · = 0. For even values of n, let n = 2m; then
                           a2m−2                   a2m−2
            a2m = −                      =− 2                ,       m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
                      (2m + 2)(2m)              2 (m + 1)m
By solving this recurrence relation, we obtain
                                    (−1)m a0
                       a2m =                       ,     m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .             (26)
                                2 (m + 1)!m!
                                 2m
The Bessel function of the first kind of order one, denoted by J1 , is obtained by
choosing a0 = 1/2. Hence
                                              ∞
                                          x  (−1)m x2m
                               J1 (x) =                            .                      (27)
                                          2       22m (m + 1)!m!
                                             m=0
The series converges absolutely for all x, so the function J1 is analytic everywhere.
   In determining a second solution of Bessel’s equation of order one, we illustrate
the method of direct substitution. The calculation of the general term in Eq. (28)
below is rather complicated, but the first few coefficients can be found fairly easily.
According to Theorem 5.6.1, we assume that
                                                        ∞
                                                                 
                                                      
                                             −1
                   y2 (x) = aJ1 (x) ln x + x     1+            n
                                                           cn x ,           x > 0.               (28)
                                                      n=1
Computing y2 (x), y2 (x), substituting in Eq. (23), and making use of the fact that J1 is
a solution of Eq. (23), we obtain
                  ∞                                                        ∞
     2axJ1 (x) +      [(n − 1)(n − 2)cn + (n − 1)cn − cn ] x      n−1
                                                                         +      cn xn+1 = 0,     (29)
                  n=0                                                       n=0
where c0 = 1. Substituting for J1 (x) from Eq. (27), shifting the indices of summation
in the two series, and carrying out several steps of algebra, we arrive at
                           ∞
−c1 + [0 · c2 + c0 ]x +        [(n2 − 1)cn+1 + cn−1 ]xn
                           n=2
                                                            ∞
                                                                                             
                                                               (−1)m (2m + 1)x2m+1
                                            = −a x +                                           . (30)
                                                                      22m (m + 1)! m!
                                                          m=1
From Eq. (30) we observe first that c1 = 0, and a = −c0 = −1. Further, since there
are only odd powers of x on the right, the coefficient of each even power of x on the
left must be zero. Thus, since c1 = 0, we have c3 = c5 = · · · = 0. Corresponding to
the odd powers of x, we obtain the following recurrence relation [let n = 2m + 1
in the series on the left side of Eq. (30)]:
                                              (−1)m (2m + 1)
          [(2m + 1)2 − 1]c2m+2 + c2m =                           ,        m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .   (31)
                                              22m (m + 1)! m!
When we set m = 1 in Eq. (31), we obtain
                               (32 − 1)c4 + c2 = (−1)3/(22 · 2!).
Notice that c2 can be selected arbitrarily, and then this equation determines c4 . Also
notice that in the equation for the coefficient of x, c2 appeared multiplied by 0, and
that equation was used to determine a. Thatc2 is arbitrary             is not surprising, since c2
                                                −1
                                                          ∞
is the coefficient of x in the expression x           1+              n
                                                               cn x . Consequently, c2 simply
                                                          n=1
generates a multiple of J1 , and y2 is determined only up to an additive multiple of J1 .
In accordance with the usual practice, we choose c2 = 1/22 . Then we obtain
                                                                         
                                 −1 3              −1              1
                         c4 = 4           +1 = 4            1+          +1
                               2 ·2 2              2 2!            2
                                (−1)
                            =          (H2 + H1 ).
                               24 · 2!
It is possible to show that the solution of the recurrence relation (31) is
                               (−1)m+1 (Hm + Hm−1 )
                       c2m =                            ,      m = 1, 2, . . .
                                   22m m!(m − 1)!
         with the understanding that H0 = 0. Thus
                                                    ∞
                                                                                    
                                       1              (−1)m (Hm + Hm−1 ) 2m
              y2 (x) = −J1 (x) ln x +       1−                                  x     ,     x > 0.   (32)
                                       x          m=1
                                                          22m m!(m − 1)!
            The calculation of y2 (x) using the alternative procedure [see Eqs. (19) and (20)
         of Section 5.6] in which we determine the cn (r2 ) is slightly easier. In particular, the
         latter procedure yields the general formula for c2m without the necessity of solving a
         recurrence relation of the form (31) (see Problem 11). In this regard, you may also
         wish to compare the calculations of the second solution of Bessel’s equation of order
         zero in the text and in Problem 10.
            The second solution of Eq. (23), the Bessel function of the second kind of order
         one, Y1 , is usually taken to be a certain linear combination of J1 and y2 . Following
         Copson (Chapter 12), Y1 is defined as
                                                 2
                                    Y1 (x) =       [−y2 (x) + (γ − ln 2)J1 (x)],                     (33)
                                                π
         where γ is defined in Eq. (12). The general solution of Eq. (23) for x > 0 is
                                              y = c1 J1 (x) + c2 Y1 (x).
         Notice that although J1 is analytic at x = 0, the second solution Y1 becomes
         unbounded in the same manner as 1/x as x → 0. The graphs of J1 and Y1 are shown
         in Figure 5.7.5.
                               y
                                1
                                         y = J1(x)
                              0.5
                                                   y = Y1(x)
                                       2       4        6     8        10     12    14    x
                             –0.5
                                 FIGURE 5.7.5 The Bessel functions J1 and Y1 .
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4, show that the given differential equation has a regular singular
         point at x = 0, and determine two solutions for x > 0.
          1. x2 y + 2xy + xy = 0                          2. x2 y + 3xy + (1 + x)y = 0
          3. x2 y + xy + 2xy = 0                          4. x2 y + 4xy + (2 + x)y = 0
          5. Find two solutions (not multiples of each other) of the Bessel equation of order 23
                                                              
                                       x2 y + xy + x2 − 94 y = 0,         x > 0.
 6. Show that the Bessel equation of order one-half
                                                          
                                 x2 y + xy + x2 − 41 y = 0,            x>0
    can be reduced to the equation
                                                   v + v = 0
    by the change of dependent variable y = x−1/2 v(x). From this, conclude that
    y1 (x) = x−1/2 cos x and y2 (x) = x−1/2 sin x are solutions of the Bessel equation of order
    one-half.
 7. Show directly that the series for J0 (x), Eq. (7), converges absolutely for all x.
 8. Show directly that the series for J1 (x), Eq. (27), converges absolutely for all x and that
    J0 (x) = −J1 (x).
 9. Consider the Bessel equation of order ν
                                 x2 y + xy + (x2 − ν2 )y = 0,          x > 0,
    where ν is real and positive.
    (a) Show that x = 0 is a regular singular point and that the roots of the indicial equation
    are ν and −ν.
    (b) Corresponding to the larger root ν, show that one solution is
                             
                                        1       x 2               1              x 4
                 y1 (x) = xν 1 −                       +
                                    1!(1 + ν) 2           2!(1 + ν)(2 + ν) 2
                                                                                                  
                                                           ∞
                                                                       (−1)m              x 2m
                                                       +                                            .
                                                          m=3
                                                               m!(1 + ν) · · · (m + ν) 2
    (c) If 2ν is not an integer, show that a second solution is
                              
                                         1       x 2               1              x 4
                y2 (x) = x−ν 1 −                       +
                                     1!(1 − ν) 2           2!(1 − ν)(2 − ν) 2
                                                                                                  
                                                            ∞
                                                                        (−1)m               x 2m
                                                        +                                            .
                                                           m=3
                                                                m!(1 − ν) · · · (m − ν) 2
    Note that y1 (x) → 0 as x → 0, and that y2 (x) is unbounded as x → 0.
    (d) Verify by direct methods that the power series in the expressions for y1 (x) and y2 (x)
    converge absolutely for all x. Also verify that y2 is a solution, provided only that ν is not
    an integer.
10. In this section we showed that one solution of Bessel’s equation of order zero
                                        L[y] = x2 y + xy + x2 y = 0
    is J0 , where J0 (x) is given by Eq. (7) with a0 = 1. According to Theorem 5.6.1, a second
    solution has the form (x > 0)
                                                                ∞
                                        y2 (x) = J0 (x) ln x +      bn x n .
                                                                n=1
    (a) Show that
                                ∞                      ∞            ∞
                   L[y2 ](x) =       n(n − 1)bn xn +         nbn xn +        bn xn+2 + 2xJ0 (x).      (i)
                                n=2                     n=1           n=1
    (b) Substituting the series representation for J0 (x) in Eq. (i), show that
                                                   ∞                               ∞
                                                                                        (−1)n 2nx2n
                         b1 x + 2 2 b 2 x 2 +           (n2 bn + bn−2 )xn = −2                         .     (ii)
                                                   n=3                              n=1
                                                                                           22n (n!)2
    (c) Note that only even powers of x appear on the right side of Eq. (ii). Show that
    b1 = b3 = b5 = · · · = 0, b2 = 1/22 (1!)2 , and that
                      (2n)2 b2n + b2n−2 = −2(−1)n (2n)/22n (n!)2 ,                      n = 2, 3, 4, . . . .
    Deduce that
                                                                                     
                                       1              1                         1            1 1
                        b4 = − 2 2            1+              and     b6 =              1+       +      .
                                     2 4              2                      22 42 62        2 3
    The general solution of the recurrence relation is b2n = (−1)n+1 Hn /22n (n!)2 . Substituting
    for bn in the expression for y2 (x), we obtain the solution given in Eq. (10).
11. Find a second solution of Bessel’s equation of order one by computing the cn (r2 ) and a
    of Eq. (24) of Section 5.6 according to the formulas (19) and (20) of that section. Some
    guidelines along the way of this calculation are the following. First, use Eq. (24) of this
    section to show that a1 (−1) and a1 (−1) are 0. Then show that c1 (−1) = 0 and, from the
    recurrence relation, that cn (−1) = 0 for n = 3, 5, . . . . Finally, use Eq. (25) to show that
                                            a0                                            a0
                   a2 (r) = −                            ,      a4 (r) =
                                    (r + 1)(r + 3)                         (r + 1)(r + 3)(r + 3)(r + 5)
    and that
                                                             (−1)m a0
                a2m (r) =                                                                      ,      m ≥ 3.
                                (r + 1) · · · (r + 2m − 1)(r + 3) · · · (r + 2m + 1)
    Then show that
                      c2m (−1) = (−1)m+1 (Hm + Hm−1 )/22m m!(m − 1)!,                            m ≥ 1.
12. By a suitable change of variables it is sometimes possible to transform another differential
    equation into a Bessel equation. For example, show that a solution of
                                                                         
                                    x2 y + α2 β2 x2β + 14 − ν2 β2 y = 0,               x>0
    is given by y = x1/2 f (αxβ ), where f (ξ) is a solution of the Bessel equation of order ν.
13. Using the result of Problem 12, show that the general solution of the Airy equation
                                                     y − xy = 0,          x>0
    is  y = x1/2 [c1 f1 ( 23 ix3/2 ) + c2 f2 ( 23 ix3/2 )], where     f1 (ξ) and f2 (ξ) are a fundamental set of
    solutions of the Bessel equation of order one-third.
14. It can be shown that J0 has infinitely many zeros for x > 0. In particular, the first three
    zeros are approximately 2.405, 5.520, and 8.653 (see Figure 5.7.1). Let λj , j = 1, 2, 3, . . . ,
    denote the zeros of J0 ; it follows that
                                                                 
                                                                    1, x = 0,
                                                    J0 (λj x) =
                                                                    0, x = 1.
    Verify that y = J0 (λj x) satisfies the differential equation
                                                       1
                                             y + y + λ2j y = 0,              x > 0.
                                                       x
                Hence show that
                                            1
                                                xJ0 (λi x)J0 (λj x) dx = 0    if  λi  = λj .
                                             0
                This important property of J0 (λi x), which is known as the orthogonality property, is useful
                in solving boundary value problems.
                Hint: Write the differential equation for J0 (λi x). Multiply it by xJ0 (λj x) and subtract it
                from xJ0 (λi x) times the differential equation for J0 (λj x). Then integrate from 0 to 1.
REFERENCES Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
              Prentice-Hall, 1961; New York: Dover, 1989).
           Coddington, E. A., and Carlson, R., Linear Ordinary Differential Equations (Philadelphia, PA: Society
              for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1997).
           Copson, E. T., An Introduction to the Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable (Oxford: Oxford
              University Press, 1935).
              Proofs of Theorems 5.3.1 and 5.6.1 can be found in intermediate or advanced books; for example, see
           Chapters 3 and 4 of Coddington, Chapters 5 and 6 of Coddington and Carlson, or Chapters 3 and 4 of
           Rainville, E. D., Intermediate Differential Equations (2nd ed.) (New York: Macmillan, 1964).
              Also see these texts for a discussion of the point at infinity, which was mentioned in Problem 43 of
           Section 5.4. The behavior of solutions near an irregular singular point is an even more advanced topic; a
           brief discussion can be found in Chapter 5 of
           Coddington, E. A., and Levinson, N.,Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations (New York: McGraw-Hill,
              1955; Malabar, FL: Krieger, 1984).
              Fuller discussions of the Bessel equation, the Legendre equation, and many of the other named equa-
           tions can be found in advanced books on differential equations, methods of applied mathematics, and
           special functions. A text dealing with special functions such as the Legendre polynomials and the Bessel
           functions is
           Hochstadt, H., Special Functions of Mathematical Physics (New York: Holt, 1961).
              An excellent compilation of formulas, graphs, and tables of Bessel functions, Legendre functions, and
           other special functions of mathematical physics may be found in
           Abramowitz, M., and Stegun, I. A. (eds.), Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs,
              and Mathematical Tables (New York: Dover, 1965); originally published by the National Bureau of
              Standards, Washington, DC, 1964.
              The digital successor to Abramowitz and Stegun is
           Digital Library of Mathematical Functions. Release date 2011-08-29. National Institute of Standards and
              Technology from http://dlmf.nist.gov/.
 CHAPTER
     6
               The Laplace
               Transform
               Many practical engineering problems involve mechanical or electrical systems acted
               on by discontinuous or impulsive forcing terms. For such problems the methods
               described in Chapter 3 are often rather awkward to use. Another method that is espe-
               cially well suited to these problems, although useful much more generally, is based
               on the Laplace transform. In this chapter we describe how this important method
               works, emphasizing problems typical of those that arise in engineering applications.
6.1 Definition of the Laplace Transform
               Improper Integrals. Since the Laplace transform involves an integral from zero to infin-
               ity, a knowledge of improper integrals of this type is necessary to appreciate the
               subsequent development of the properties of the transform.We provide a brief review
               of such improper integrals here. If you are already familiar with improper integrals,
               you may wish to skip over this review. On the other hand, if improper integrals are
               new to you, then you should probably consult a calculus book, where you will find
               many more details and examples.
                  An improper integral over an unbounded interval is defined as a limit of integrals
               over finite intervals; thus
                                             ∞                 A
                                                f (t) dt = lim     f (t) dt,                         (1)
                                              a           A→∞ a
               where A is a positive real number. If the integral from a to A exists for each A > a,
               and if the limit as A → ∞ exists, then the improper integral is said to converge to
               that limiting value. Otherwise the integral is said to diverge, or to fail to exist. The
               following examples illustrate both possibilities.
                                                                                                    309
        Let f (t) = ect , t ≥ 0, where c is a real nonzero constant. Then
EXAMPLE
                                            ∞                    A                      A
                                                                                     ect 
   1                                             e dt = lim
                                                  ct
                                                           A→∞
                                                                      e dt = lim
                                                                       ct
                                                                               A→∞ c 
                                                                                          
                                             0                    0
                                                                                           0
                                                                 1
                                                         = lim     (ecA − 1).
                                                           A→∞ c
        It follows that the improper integral converges to the value −1/c if c < 0 and diverges if c > 0.
        If c = 0, the integrand f (t) is the constant function with value 1. In this case
                                                      A
                                                lim       1 dt = lim (A − 0) = ∞,
                                               A→∞     0          A→∞
        so the integral again diverges.
        Let f (t) = 1/t, t ≥ 1. Then
EXAMPLE                                         ∞                A
                                                     dt                dt
   2                                            1    t
                                                         = lim
                                                           A→∞ 1       t
                                                                           = lim ln A.
                                                                             A→∞
        Since lim ln A = ∞, the improper integral diverges.
                 A→∞
        Let f (t) = t −p , t ≥ 1, where p is a real constant and p  = 1; the case p = 1 was considered in
EXAMPLE Example 2. Then
   3                               ∞                      A
                                                                                1
                                        t −p dt = lim         t −p dt = lim          (A1−p − 1).
                                    1               A→∞ 1                 A→∞ 1 − p
                                                                                             ∞
        As A → ∞, A1−p → 0 if p > 1, but A1−p → ∞ if p < 1. Hence                               t −p dt converges to the
                                                                                             1
        value 1/( p − 1) for p > 1 but (incorporating the result of Example 2) diverges for p ≤ 1.
                                                                                 ∞
        These results are analogous to those for the infinite series                  n−p .
                                                                                 n=1
                                                                              ∞
            Before discussing the possible existence of                           f (t) dt, it is helpful to define
                                                                              a
        certain terms. A function f is said to be piecewise continuous on an inter-
        val α ≤ t ≤ β if the interval1 can be partitioned by a finite number of points
        α = t0 < t1 < · · · < tn = β so that
        1. f is continuous on each open subinterval ti−1 < t < ti .
        2. f approaches a finite limit as the endpoints of each subinterval are approached from within
               the subinterval.
        In other words, f is piecewise continuous on α ≤ t ≤ β if it is continuous there except
        for a finite number of jump discontinuities. If f is piecewise continuous on α ≤ t ≤ β
        for every β > α, then f is said to be piecewise continuous on t ≥ α. An example of a
        piecewise continuous function is shown in Figure 6.1.1.
        1 It is not essential that the interval be closed; the same definition applies if the interval is open at one or
        both ends.
                                             y
                                                     α       t1          t2         β         t
                                 FIGURE 6.1.1 A piecewise continuous function y = f (t).
                 The integral of a piecewise continuous function on a finite interval is just the sum
              of the integrals on the subintervals created by the partition points. For instance, for
              the function f (t) shown in Figure 6.1.1, we have
                                    β               t1             t2               β
                                        f (t) dt =       f (t) dt +      f (t) dt +       f (t) dt.                   (2)
                                     α               α               t1                t2
              For the function shown in Figure 6.1.1, we have assigned values to the function at
              the endpoints α and β and at the partition points t1 and t2 . However, as far as the
              integrals in Eq. (2) are concerned, it does not matter whether f (t) is defined at these
              points, or what values may be assigned to f (t) at them. The values of the integrals in
              Eq. (2) remain the same regardless.                                                    A
                 Thus, if f is piecewise continuous on the interval a ≤ t ≤ A, then                     f (t) dt exists.
                                                                                A                   a
              Hence, if f is piecewise continuous for t ≥ a, then                   f (t) dt exists for each A > a.
                                                                                a
              However, piecewise continuity is not enough to ensure convergence of the improper
                         ∞
              integral       f (t) dt, as the preceding examples show.
                         a
                 If f cannot be integrated easily in terms of elementary functions, the definition of
                                  ∞
              convergence of           f (t) dt may be difficult to apply. Frequently, the most convenient
                                   a
              way to test the convergence or divergence of an improper integral is by the following
              comparison theorem, which is analogous to a similar theorem for infinite series.
Theorem 6.1.1 If f is piecewise continuous for t ≥ a, if | f (t)| ≤ g(t) when t ≥ M for some positive
                                        ∞                                 ∞
              constant M, and if             g(t) dt converges, then            f (t) dt also converges. On the
                                        M
                                                                         ∞ a
                                                                                                           ∞
              other hand, if f (t) ≥ g(t) ≥ 0 for t ≥ M, and if               g(t) dt diverges, then            f (t) dt
                                                                          M                                 a
              also diverges.
                 The proof of this result from calculus will not be given here. It is made plausible,
                                                                               ∞                    ∞
              however, by comparing the areas represented by                        g(t) dt and         | f (t)| dt. The
                                                                                M                    M
              functions most useful for comparison purposes are ect and t −p , which we considered
              in Examples 1, 2, and 3.
              The Laplace Transform. Among the tools that are very useful for solving linear differ-
              ential equations are integral transforms. An integral transform is a relation of the
              form                                              β
                                                    F(s) =         K(s, t)f (t) dt,                                (3)
                                                               α
              where K(s, t) is a given function, called the kernel of the transformation, and the
              limits of integration α and β are also given. It is possible that α = −∞, or β = ∞,
              or both. The relation (3) transforms the function f into another function F, which is
              called the transform of f .
                 There are several integral transforms that are useful in applied mathematics, but
              in this chapter we consider only the Laplace2 transform. This transform is defined
              in the following way. Let f (t) be given for t ≥ 0, and suppose that f satisfies certain
              conditions to be stated a little later. Then the Laplace transform of f , which we will
              denote by L{f (t)} or by F(s), is defined by the equation
                                                                      ∞
                                               L{f (t)} = F(s) =           e−st f (t) dt,                          (4)
                                                                       0
              whenever this improper integral converges. The Laplace transform makes use of
              the kernel K(s, t) = e−st . Since the solutions of linear differential equations with
              constant coefficients are based on the exponential function, the Laplace transform is
              particularly useful for such equations.The general idea in using the Laplace transform
              to solve a differential equation is as follows:
              1.   Use the relation (4) to transform an initial value problem for an unknown function f in
                   the t-domain into a simpler problem (indeed, an algebraic problem) for F in the s-domain.
              2.   Solve this algebraic problem to find F.
              3.   Recover the desired function f from its transform F. This last step is known as “inverting
                   the transform.”
                  In general, the parameter s may be complex, and the full power of the Laplace
              transform becomes available only when we regard F(s) as a function of a complex
              variable. However, for the problems discussed here, it is sufficient to consider only
              real values of s. The Laplace transform F of a function f exists if f satisfies certain
              conditions, such as those stated in the following theorem.
Theorem 6.1.2 Suppose that
              1. f is piecewise continuous on the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ A for any positive A.
              2. | f (t)| ≤ Keat when t ≥ M. In this inequality, K, a, and M are real constants, K and M
                   necessarily positive.
              Then the Laplace transform L{f (t)} = F(s), defined by Eq. (4), exists for s > a.
              2The Laplace transform is named for the eminent French mathematician P. S. Laplace,who studied the rela-
              tion (3) in 1782. However, the techniques described in this chapter were not developed until a century or
              more later. We owe them mainly to Oliver Heaviside (1850–1925), an innovative self-taught English elec-
              trical engineer, who made significant contributions to the development and application of electromagnetic
              theory. He was also one of the developers of vector calculus.
          To establish this theorem, we must show that the integral in Eq. (4) converges for
        s > a. Splitting the improper integral into two parts, we have
                                ∞                        M                         ∞
                                       −st                       −st
                                      e f (t) dt =              e f (t) dt +               e−st f (t) dt.            (5)
                                 0                         0                          M
        The first integral on the right side of Eq. (5) exists by hypothesis (1) of the theorem;
        hence the existence of F(s) depends on the convergence of the second integral. By
        hypothesis (2) we have, for t ≥ M,
                                             |e−st f (t)| ≤ Ke−st eat = Ke(a−s)t ,
                                                                                        ∞
        and thus, by Theorem 6.1.1, F(s) exists provided that                               e(a−s)t dt converges. Refer-
                                                                                         M
        ring to Example 1 with c replaced by a − s, we see that this latter integral converges
        when a − s < 0, which establishes Theorem 6.1.2.
           In this chapter (except in Section 6.5), we deal almost exclusively with functions
        that satisfy the conditions of Theorem 6.1.2. Such functions are described as piecewise
        continuous and of exponential order as t → ∞. Note that there are functions that
                                                                                                             2
        are not of exponential order as t → ∞. One such function is f (t) = et . As t → ∞,
                                                             at
        this function increases faster than Ke regardless of how large the constants K and
        a may be.
          The Laplace transforms of some important elementary functions are given in the
        following examples.
        Let f (t) = 1, t ≥ 0. Then, as in Example 1,
EXAMPLE                                     ∞                                A
                                                                        e−st         1
   4                              L{1} =        e −st
                                                       dt = − lim
                                                                 A→∞ s 
                                                                               = ,
                                                                                       s
                                                                                               s > 0.
                                              0
                                                                                0
        Let f (t) = eat , t ≥ 0. Then, again referring to Example 1,
EXAMPLE                                                ∞                   ∞
   5                                     L{eat } =          e−st eat dt =          e−(s−a)t dt
                                                       0                     0
                                                         1
                                                 =           ,       s > a.
                                                      s−a
        Let                                                  ⎧
EXAMPLE                                                      ⎪
                                                             ⎨1,     0 ≤ t < 1,
   6                                              f (t) = k,         t = 1,
                                                             ⎪
                                                             ⎩0,     t > 1,
        where k is a constant. In engineering contexts f (t) often represents a unit pulse, perhaps of
        force or voltage.
           Note that f is a piecewise continuous function. Then
                                    ∞                    1                        1
                                         −st                    −st           e−st       1 − e−s
                     L{ f (t)} =        e f (t) dt =           e dt = −              =              ,    s > 0.
                                    0                      0                      s           s
                                                                                      0
        Observe that L{ f (t)} does not depend on k, the function value at the point of discontinuity.
        Even if f (t) is not defined at this point, the Laplace transform of f remains the same. Thus
        there are many functions, differing only in their value at a single point, that have the same
        Laplace transform.
        Let f (t) = sin at, t ≥ 0. Then
EXAMPLE                                                     ∞
   7                              L{sin at} = F(s) =              e−st sin at dt,       s > 0.
                                                             0
        Since
                                                                A
                                             F(s) = lim               e−st sin at dt,
                                                       A→∞      0
        upon integrating by parts, we obtain
                                              ⎡                   A                           ⎤
                                                     −st                     A
                                                   e     cos   at         s
                                F(s) = lim ⎣−                      −             e cos at dt ⎦
                                                                                   −st
                                        A→∞              a               a 0
                                                                    0
                                                  ∞
                                         1    s
                                     =     −           e−st cos at dt.
                                         a a      0
        A second integration by parts then yields
                                                                 ∞
                                                      1      s2
                                            F(s) =       − 2            e−st sin at dt
                                                      a a          0
                                                      1      s2
                                                  =      − 2 F(s).
                                                      a a
        Hence, solving for F(s), we have
                                                             a
                                              F(s) =                 ,       s > 0.
                                                         s2 + a2
           Now let us suppose that f1 and f2 are two functions whose Laplace transforms exist
        for s > a1 and s > a2 , respectively. Then, for s greater than the maximum of a1 and a2 ,
                                                     ∞
                       L{c1 f1 (t) + c2 f2 (t)} =           e−st [c1 f1 (t) + c2 f2 (t)] dt
                                                      0
                                                         ∞                             ∞
                                                = c1           e−st f1 (t) dt + c2         e−st f2 (t) dt;
                                                          0                             0
        hence
                                 L{c1 f1 (t) + c2 f2 (t)} = c1 L{f1 (t)} + c2 L{f2 (t)}.                   (6)
        Equation (6) states that the Laplace transform is a linear operator, and we make
        frequent use of this property later. The sum in Eq. (6) can be readily extended to an
        arbitrary number of terms.
        Find the Laplace transform of f (t) = 5e−2t − 3 sin 4t, t ≥ 0.
EXAMPLE    Using Eq. (6), we write
   8                                       L{ f (t)} = 5L{e−2t } − 3L{sin 4t}.
        Then, from Examples 5 and 7, we obtain
                                                        5              12
                                       L{ f (t)} =            −              ,     s > 0.
                                                     s + 2 s2 + 16
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4, sketch the graph of the given function. In each case deter-
         mine whether f is continuous, piecewise continuous, or neither on the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 3.
                        ⎧2                                                 ⎧2
                        ⎨t ,      0≤t≤1                                    ⎨t ,         0≤t≤1
          1. f (t) = 2 + t, 1 < t ≤ 2                          2. f (t) = (t − 1)−1 , 1 < t ≤ 2
                        ⎩                                                  ⎩
                          6 − t, 2 < t ≤ 3                                    1,        2<t≤3
                        ⎧2                                                 ⎧
                        ⎨t ,      0≤t≤1                                    ⎨t,        0≤t≤1
          3. f (t) = 1,           1<t≤2                        4. f (t) = 3 − t, 1 < t ≤ 2
                        ⎩                                                  ⎩
                          3 − t, 2 < t ≤ 3                                    1,      2<t≤3
          5. Find the Laplace transform of each of the following functions:
              (a) f (t) = t
              (b) f (t) = t 2
              (c) f (t) = t n , where n is a positive integer
          6. Find the Laplace transform of f (t) = cos at, where a is a real constant.
         Recall that cosh bt = (ebt + e−bt )/2 and sinh bt = (ebt − e−bt )/2. In each of Problems 7 through
         10, find the Laplace transform of the given function; a and b are real constants.
          7. f (t) = cosh bt                                   8. f (t) = sinh bt
          9. f (t) = eat cosh bt                              10. f (t) = eat sinh bt
         Recall that cos bt = (eibt + e−ibt )/2 and that sin bt = (eibt − e−ibt )/2i. In each of Problems 11
         through 14, find the Laplace transform of the given function; a and b are real constants.
         Assume that the necessary elementary integration formulas extend to this case.
         11. f (t) = sin bt                                   12. f (t) = cos bt
         13. f (t) = e sin bt
                         at
                                                              14. f (t) = eat cos bt
         In each of Problems 15 through 20, use integration by parts to find the Laplace transform of
         the given function; n is a positive integer and a is a real constant.
         15. f (t) = teat                                     16. f (t) = t sin at
         17. f (t) = t cosh at                                18. f (t) = t n eat
         19. f (t) = t 2 sin at                               20. f (t) = t 2 sinh at
         In each of Problems 21 through 24, find the Laplace transform of the given function.
                                                                          
                          1, 0 ≤ t < π                                       t, 0 ≤ t < 1
         21. f (t) =                                          22. f (t) =
                          0, π ≤ t < ∞                                       0, 1 ≤ t < ∞
                                                                           ⎧
                                                                          ⎪          0≤t<1
                          t, 0 ≤ t < 1                                     ⎨t,
         23. f (t) =                                          24. f (t) = 2 − t, 1 ≤ t < 2
                          1, 1 ≤ t < ∞                                     ⎪
                                                                           ⎩0,        2≤t<∞
         In each of Problems 25 through 28, determine whether the given integral converges or diverges.
               ∞                                                  ∞
         25.       (t 2 + 1)−1 dt                             26.       te−t dt
               0                                                    0
               ∞                                                  ∞
         27.       t −2 et dt                                 28.       e−t cos t dt
               1                                                    0
29. Suppose that f and f  are continuous for t ≥ 0 and of exponential order as t → ∞. Use
    integration by parts to show that if F(s) = L{ f (t)}, then lim F(s) = 0. The result is actually
                                                                          s→∞
    true under less restrictive conditions, such as those of Theorem 6.1.2.
30. The Gamma Function. The gamma function is denoted by (p) and is defined by the
    integral                                                 ∞
                                        (p + 1) =              e−x xp dx.                                (i)
                                                            0
    The integral converges as x → ∞ for all p. For p < 0 it is also improper at x = 0,
    because the integrand becomes unbounded as x → 0. However, the integral can be shown
    to converge at x = 0 for p > −1.
    (a) Show that, for p > 0,
                                              (p + 1) = p(p).
    (b) Show that (1) = 1.
    (c) If p is a positive integer n, show that
                                                 (n + 1) = n!.
    Since (p) is also defined when p is not an integer, this function provides an extension
    of the factorial function to nonintegral values of the independent variable. Note that it is
    also consistent to define 0! = 1.
    (d) Show that, for p > 0,
                          p(p + 1)(p + 2) · · · (p + n − 1) = (p + n)/ (p).
    Thus (p) can be determined for all positive values of p if (p)          is √known in a single
                                                                                                   interval
                                                                                                        
    of unit length—say, 0 < p ≤ 1. It is possible to show that  21 = π. Find  23 and  11              2
                                                                                                            .
31. Consider the Laplace transform of t p , where p > −1.
    (a) Referring to Problem 30, show that
                                          ∞                           ∞
                                                                  1
                              L{t p } =         e−st t p dt = p+1           e−x xp dx
                                          0                     s       0
                                      = ( p + 1)/sp+1 ,             s > 0.
    (b) Let p be a positive integer n in part (a); show that
                                       L{t n } = n!/sn+1 ,            s > 0.
    (c) Show that                                      ∞
                                                 2              2
                                L{t −1/2 } = √              e−x dx,          s > 0.
                                                  s     0
    It is possible to show that                                   √
                                              ∞
                                                         2           π
                                                   e−x dx =             ;
                                               0                    2
    hence                                               
                                       L{t −1/2 } =        π/s,        s > 0.
    (d) Show that
                                                  √
                                    L{t 1/2 } =      π/(2s3/2 ),          s > 0.
6.2 Solution of Initial Value Problems
                In this section we show how the Laplace transform can be used to solve initial value
                problems for linear differential equations with constant coefficients. The usefulness
                of the Laplace transform for this purpose rests primarily on the fact that the transform
                of f  is related in a simple way to the transform of f . The relationship is expressed in
                the following theorem.
 Theorem 6.2.1  Suppose that f is continuous and f  is piecewise continuous on any interval
                0 ≤ t ≤ A. Suppose further that there exist constants K, a, and M such that
                |f (t)| ≤ Keat for t ≥ M. Then L{f  (t)} exists for s > a, and moreover,
                                                          L{f  (t)} = sL{f (t)} − f (0).                                                (1)
                   To prove this theorem, we consider the integral
                                                                     A
                                                                          e−st f  (t) dt,
                                                                      0
                whose limit as A → ∞, if it exists, is the Laplace transform of f  . To calculate this limit
                we first need to write the integral in a suitable form. If f  has points of discontinuity
                in the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ A, let them be denoted by t1 , t2 , . . . , tk . Then we can write the
                integral as
                         A                       t1                          t2                                A
                              e−st f  (t) dt =         e−st f  (t) dt +           e−st f  (t) dt + · · · +          e−st f  (t) dt.
                          0                        0                            t1                                tk
                Integrating each term on the right by parts yields
                    A                                  t1                t 2                         A
                                                                                                      
                         e−st f  (t) dt = e−st f (t) + e−st f (t) + · · · + e−st f (t)
                     0                                    0                  t1                           tk
                                                       t1                         t2                               A                 
                                                                −st                       −st                              −st
                                               +s             e     f (t) dt +          e      f (t) dt + · · · +        e       f (t) dt .
                                                          0                         t1                                tk
                Since f is continuous, the contributions of the integrated terms at t1 , t2 , . . . , tk cancel.
                Further, the integrals on the right side can be combined into a single integral, so that
                we obtain                                                                         
                                           A                                                           A
                                             e−st f  (t) dt = e−sA f (A) − f (0) + s                    e−st f (t) dt.                    (2)
                                         0                                                           0
                   Now we let A → ∞ in Eq. (2). The integral on the right side of this equa-
                tion approaches L{f (t)}. Further, for A ≥ M, we have | f (A)| ≤ KeaA ; consequently,
                |e−sA f (A)| ≤ Ke−(s−a)A . Hence e−sA f (A) → 0 as A → ∞ whenever s > a. Thus the
                right side of Eq. (2) has the limit sL{f (t)} − f (0) . Consequently, the left side of
                Eq. (2) also has a limit, and as noted above, this limit is L{f  (t)}. Therefore, for s > a,
                we conclude that
                                                            L{f  (t)} = sL{f (t)} − f (0),
                which establishes the theorem.
                   If f  and f  satisfy the same conditions that are imposed on f and f  , respectively,
                in Theorem 6.2.1, then it follows that the Laplace transform of f  also exists for s > a
                and is given by
                                              L{f  (t)} = sL{f  (t)} − f  (0)
                                                          = s[sL{f (t)} − f (0)] − f  (0)
                                                          = s2 L{f (t)} − sf (0) − f  (0).                       (3)
                Indeed, provided the function f and its derivatives satisfy suitable conditions, an
                expression for the transform of the nth derivative f (n) can be derived by n successive
                applications of this theorem. The result is given in the following corollary.
Corollary 6.2.2 Suppose that the functions f , f  , . . . , f (n−1) are continuous and that f (n) is piecewise
                continuous on any interval 0 ≤ t ≤ A. Suppose further that there exist constants
                K, a, and M such that |f (t)| ≤ Keat , | f  (t)| ≤ Keat , . . . , | f (n−1) (t)| ≤ Keat for t ≥ M.
                Then L{ f (n) (t)} exists for s > a and is given by
                             L{f (n) (t)} = sn L{f (t)} − sn−1 f (0) − · · · − sf (n−2) (0) − f (n−1) (0).       (4)
                   We now show how the Laplace transform can be used to solve initial value prob-
                lems. It is most useful for problems involving nonhomogeneous differential equations,
                as we will demonstrate in later sections of this chapter. However, we begin by looking
                at some homogeneous equations, which are a bit simpler.
                Consider the differential equation
  EXAMPLE
                                                              y − y − 2y = 0                                    (5)
       1
                and the initial conditions
                                                        y(0) = 1,         y (0) = 0.                              (6)
                   This problem is easily solved by the methods of Section 3.1. The characteristic equation is
                                                   r 2 − r − 2 = (r − 2)(r + 1) = 0,
                and consequently, the general solution of Eq. (5) is
                                                             y = c1 e−t + c2 e2t .                                 (7)
                To satisfy the initial conditions (6), we must have c1 + c2 = 1 and −c1 + 2c2 = 0; hence c1 = 23
                and c2 = 13 , so the solution of the initial value problem (5) and (6) is
                                                         y = φ(t) = 23 e−t + 13 e2t .                              (8)
                   Now let us solve the same problem by using the Laplace transform. To do this, we must
                assume that the problem has a solution y = φ(t), which with its first two derivatives satisfies the
                conditions of Corollary 6.2.2. Then, taking the Laplace transform of the differential equation
                (5), we obtain
                                                       L{y } − L{y } − 2L{y} = 0,                               (9)
where we have used the linearity of the transform to write the transform of a sum as the sum
of the separate transforms. Upon using the corollary to express L{y } and L{y } in terms of
L{y}, we find that Eq. (9) becomes
                         s2 L{y} − sy(0) − y (0) − [sL{y} − y(0)] − 2L{y} = 0,
or
                                (s2 − s − 2)Y(s) + (1 − s)y(0) − y (0) = 0,                       (10)
where Y(s) = L{y}. Substituting for y(0) and y (0) in Eq. (10) from the initial conditions (6),
and then solving for Y(s), we obtain
                                               s−1               s−1
                                    Y(s) =              =                    .                     (11)
                                            s2 − s − 2     (s − 2)(s + 1)
We have thus obtained an expression for the Laplace transform Y(s) of the solution y = φ(t) of
the given initial value problem. To determine the function φ, we must find the function whose
Laplace transform is Y(s), as given by Eq. (11).
   This can be done most easily by expanding the right side of Eq. (11) in partial fractions.
Thus we write
                                   s−1             a         b        a(s + 1) + b(s − 2)
                   Y(s) =                     =        +          =                       ,        (12)
                             (s − 2)(s + 1)     s−2 s+1                  (s − 2)(s + 1)
where the coefficients a and b are to be determined. By equating numerators of the second
and fourth members of Eq. (12), we obtain
                                        s − 1 = a(s + 1) + b(s − 2),
an equation that must hold for all s. In particular, if we set s = 2, then it follows that a = 13 .
Similarly, if we set s = −1, then we find that b = 23 . By substituting these values for a and b,
respectively, we have
                                                     1/3       2/3
                                           Y(s) =         +         .                              (13)
                                                    s−2 s+1
Finally, if we use the result of Example 5 of Section 6.1, it follows that 13 e2t has the transform
1
3
  (s − 2)−1 ; similarly, 23 e−t has the transform 23 (s + 1)−1 . Hence, by the linearity of the Laplace
transform,
                                           y = φ(t) = 13 e2t + 23 e−t
has the transform (13) and is therefore the solution of the initial value problem (5),(6). Observe
that it does satisfy the conditions of Corollary 6.2.2, as we assumed initially. Of course, this is
the same solution that we obtained earlier.
   The same procedure can be applied to the general second order linear equation
with constant coefficients
                                          ay + by + cy = f (t).                                 (14)
Assuming that the solution y = φ(t) satisfies the conditions of Corollary 6.2.2 for
n = 2, we can take the transform of Eq. (14) and thereby obtain
                 a[s2 Y(s) − sy(0) − y (0)] + b[sY(s) − y(0)] + cY(s) = F(s),                     (15)
where F(s) is the transform of f (t). By solving Eq. (15) for Y(s), we find that
                                     (as + b)y(0) + ay (0)               F(s)
                           Y(s) =                                + 2                .              (16)
                                           as + bs + c
                                             2                      as + bs + c
The problem is then solved, provided that we can find the function y = φ(t) whose
transform is Y(s).
   Even at this early stage of our discussion we can point out some of the essential
features of the transform method. In the first place,the transform Y(s) of the unknown
function y = φ(t) is found by solving an algebraic equation rather than a differential
equation, Eq. (10) rather than Eq. (5) in Example 1, or in general Eq. (15) rather than
Eq. (14). This is the key to the usefulness of Laplace transforms for solving linear,
constant coefficient, ordinary differential equations—the problem is reduced from
a differential equation to an algebraic one. Next, the solution satisfying given initial
conditions is automatically found, so that the task of determining appropriate values
for the arbitrary constants in the general solution does not arise. Further, as indicated
in Eq. (15), nonhomogeneous equations are handled in exactly the same way as
homogeneous ones; it is not necessary to solve the corresponding homogeneous
equation first. Finally, the method can be applied in the same way to higher order
equations, as long as we assume that the solution satisfies the conditions of Corollary
6.2.2 for the appropriate value of n.
   Observe that the polynomial as2 + bs + c in the denominator on the right side of
Eq. (16) is precisely the characteristic polynomial associated with Eq. (14). Since the
use of a partial fraction expansion of Y(s) to determine φ(t) requires us to factor this
polynomial, the use of Laplace transforms does not avoid the necessity of finding
roots of the characteristic equation. For equations of higher than second order, this
may require a numerical approximation, particularly if the roots are irrational or
complex.
   The main difficulty that occurs in solving initial value problems by the transform
method lies in the problem of determining the function y = φ(t) corresponding to
the transform Y(s). This problem is known as the inversion problem for the Laplace
transform; φ(t) is called the inverse transform corresponding to Y(s), and the process
of finding φ(t) from Y(s) is known as inverting the transform. We also use the notation
L−1 {Y(s)} to denote the inverse transform of Y(s). There is a general formula for
the inverse Laplace transform, but its use requires a familiarity with functions of a
complex variable, and we do not consider it in this book. However, it is still possible
to develop many important properties of the Laplace transform, and to solve many
interesting problems, without the use of complex variables.
   In solving the initial value problem (5), (6), we did not consider the question of
whether there may be functions other than the one given by Eq. (8) that also have
the transform (13). By Theorem 3.2.1 we know that the initial value problem has no
other solutions. We also know that the unique solution (8) of the initial value problem
is continuous. Consistent with this fact, it can be shown that if f and g are continuous
functions with the same Laplace transform, then f and g must be identical. On the
other hand, if f and g are only piecewise continuous, then they may differ at one or
more points of discontinuity and yet have the same Laplace transform; see Example 6
in Section 6.1. This lack of uniqueness of the inverse Laplace transform for piecewise
continuous functions is of no practical significance in applications.
   Thus there is essentially a one-to-one correspondence between functions and their
Laplace transforms. This fact suggests the compilation of a table, such as Table 6.2.1,
giving the transforms of functions frequently encountered, and vice versa. The entries
in the second column of Table 6.2.1 are the transforms of those in the first column.
Perhaps more important, the functions in the first column are the inverse transforms
TABLE 6.2.1 Elementary Laplace Transforms
             f (t) = L−1 { F(s)}                        F(s) = L{ f (t)}              Notes
                                      1
 1. 1                                    ,         s>0                           Sec. 6.1; Ex. 4
                                      s
                                          1
 2. eat                                         ,          s>a                   Sec. 6.1; Ex. 5
                                      s−a
                                        n!
 3. t n ,     n = positive integer            ,          s>0                     Sec. 6.1; Prob. 31
                                      sn+1
                                      (p + 1)
 4. t p ,        p > −1                                ,      s>0                Sec. 6.1; Prob. 31
                                           sp+1
                                            a
 5. sin at                                         ,        s>0                  Sec. 6.1; Ex. 7
                                      s 2 + a2
                                            s
 6. cos at                                         ,        s>0                  Sec. 6.1; Prob. 6
                                      s 2 + a2
                                            a
 7. sinh at                                        ,        s > |a|              Sec. 6.1; Prob. 8
                                      s 2 − a2
                                            s
 8. cosh at                                        ,        s > |a|              Sec. 6.1; Prob. 7
                                      s 2 − a2
                                                 b
 9. eat sin bt                                              ,     s>a            Sec. 6.1; Prob. 13
                                      (s − a)2 + b2
                                              s−a
10. eat cos bt                                              ,     s>a            Sec. 6.1; Prob. 14
                                      (s − a)2 + b2
                                              n!
11. t n eat ,    n = positive integer                    ,     s>a               Sec. 6.1; Prob. 18
                                      (s − a)n+1
                                      e−cs
12. uc (t)                                    ,          s>0                     Sec. 6.3
                                         s
13. uc (t)f (t − c)                   e−cs F(s)                                  Sec. 6.3
14. ect f (t)                         F(s − c)                                   Sec. 6.3
                                      1         s
15. f (ct)                               F           ,        c>0                Sec. 6.3; Prob. 25
                                      c         c
     t
16.       f (t − τ)g(τ) dτ            F(s)G(s)                                   Sec. 6.6
       0
17. δ(t − c)                          e−cs                                       Sec. 6.5
18. f (n) (t)                         sn F(s) − sn−1 f (0) − · · · − f (n−1) (0) Sec. 6.2; Cor. 6.2.2
19. (−t)n f (t)                       F (n) (s)                                  Sec. 6.2; Prob. 29
        of those in the second column. Thus, for example, if the transform of the solution of
        a differential equation is known, the solution itself can often be found merely by
        looking it up in the table. Some of the entries in Table 6.2.1 have been used as
        examples, or appear as problems in Section 6.1, while others will be developed later
        in the chapter. The third column of the table indicates where the derivation of the
        given transforms may be found.AlthoughTable 6.2.1 is sufficient for the examples and
        problems in this book, much larger tables are also available (see the list of references
        at the end of the chapter). Transforms and inverse transforms can also be readily
        obtained electronically by using a computer algebra system.
           Frequently, a Laplace transform F(s) is expressible as a sum of several terms
                                       F(s) = F1 (s) + F2 (s) + · · · + Fn (s).                     (17)
        Suppose that f1 (t) = L−1 {F1 (s)}, . . . , fn (t) = L−1 {Fn (s)}. Then the function
                                             f (t) = f1 (t) + · · · + fn (t)
        has the Laplace transform F(s). By the uniqueness property stated previously, no
        other continuous function f has the same transform. Thus
                                 L−1 {F(s)} = L−1 {F1 (s)} + · · · + L−1 {Fn (s)};                  (18)
        that is, the inverse Laplace transform is also a linear operator.
           In many problems it is convenient to make use of this property by decomposing a
        given transform into a sum of functions whose inverse transforms are already known
        or can be found in the table. Partial fraction expansions are particularly useful for
        this purpose, and a general result covering many cases is given in Problem 39. Other
        useful properties of Laplace transforms are derived later in this chapter.
          As further illustrations of the technique of solving initial value problems by means
        of the Laplace transform and partial fraction expansions, consider the following
        examples.
        Find the solution of the differential equation
EXAMPLE
                                                    y + y = sin 2t                                 (19)
   2
        satisfying the initial conditions
                                               y(0) = 2,        y (0) = 1.                          (20)
          We assume that this initial value problem has a solution y = φ(t), which with its first two
        derivatives satisfies the conditions of Corollary 6.2.2. Then, taking the Laplace transform of
        the differential equation, we have
                                    s2 Y(s) − sy(0) − y (0) + Y(s) = 2/(s2 + 4),
        where the transform of sin 2t has been obtained from line 5 of Table 6.2.1. Substituting for y(0)
        and y (0) from the initial conditions and solving for Y(s), we obtain
                                                        2s3 + s2 + 8s + 6
                                              Y(s) =                        .                        (21)
                                                         (s2 + 1)(s2 + 4)
        Using partial fractions, we can write Y(s) in the form
                                  as + b cs + d           (as + b)(s2 + 4) + (cs + d)(s2 + 1)
                         Y(s) =           +          =                                        .      (22)
                                  s2 + 1     s2 + 4                  (s2 + 1)(s2 + 4)
        By expanding the numerator on the right side of Eq. (22) and equating it to the numerator in
        Eq. (21), we find that
                         2s3 + s2 + 8s + 6 = (a + c)s3 + (b + d)s2 + (4a + c)s + (4b + d)
        for all s. Then, comparing coefficients of like powers of s, we have
                                              a + c = 2,           b + d = 1,
                                             4a + c = 8,         4b + d = 6.
        Consequently, a = 2, c = 0, b = 53 , and d = − 23 , from which it follows that
                                                     2s         5/3         2/3
                                         Y(s) =             +           −          .                  (23)
                                                   s2 + 1 s2 + 1 s2 + 4
        From lines 5 and 6 of Table 6.2.1, the solution of the given initial value problem is
                                       y = φ(t) = 2 cos t + 53 sin t − 13 sin 2t.                     (24)
        Find the solution of the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                                      y(4) − y = 0,                                   (25)
   3                                                                              
                              y(0) = 0,       y (0) = 1,        y (0) = 0,          y (0) = 0.        (26)
           In this problem we need to assume that the solution y = φ(t) satisfies the conditions of
        Corollary 6.2.2 for n = 4. The Laplace transform of the differential equation (25) is
                              s4 Y(s) − s3 y(0) − s2 y (0) − sy (0) − y (0) − Y(s) = 0.
        Then, using the initial conditions (26) and solving for Y(s), we have
                                                                 s2
                                                     Y(s) =            .                              (27)
                                                               s4 − 1
        A partial fraction expansion of Y(s) is
                                                         as + b cs + d
                                               Y(s) =             + 2         ,
                                                         s2 − 1       s +1
        and it follows that
                                      (as + b)(s2 + 1) + (cs + d)(s2 − 1) = s2                        (28)
        for all s. By setting s = 1 and s = −1, respectively, in Eq. (28), we obtain the pair of equations
                                         2(a + b) = 1,          2(−a + b) = 1,
        and therefore a = 0 and b = 21 . If we set s = 0 in Eq. (28), then b − d = 0, so d = 21 . Finally,
        equating the coefficients of the cubic terms on each side of Eq. (28), we find that a + c = 0, so
        c = 0. Thus
                                                           1/2         1/2
                                               Y(s) = 2           +          ,                        (29)
                                                         s − 1 s2 + 1
        and from lines 7 and 5 of Table 6.2.1, the solution of the initial value problem (25), (26) is
                                                             sinh t + sin t
                                              y = φ(t) =                      .                       (30)
                                                                     2
           The most important elementary applications of the Laplace transform are in the
         study of mechanical vibrations and in the analysis of electric circuits; the govern-
         ing equations were derived in Section 3.7. A vibrating spring–mass system has the
         equation of motion
                                          d2 u       du
                                        m 2 +γ            + ku = F(t),                            (31)
                                           dt         dt
         where m is the mass, γ the damping coefficient, k the spring constant, and F(t) the
         applied external force. The equation that describes an electric circuit containing an
         inductance L, a resistance R, and a capacitance C (an LRC circuit) is
                                        d2 Q        dQ       1
                                      L       +R         + Q = E(t),                              (32)
                                         dt 2        dt     C
         where Q(t) is the charge on the capacitor and E(t) is the applied voltage. In terms of
         the current I(t) = dQ(t)/dt, we can differentiate Eq. (32) and write
                                        d2 I        dI     1      dE
                                      L     2
                                              +R + I =                (t).                        (33)
                                        dt          dt     C      dt
         Suitable initial conditions on u, Q, or I must also be prescribed.
           We have noted previously, in Section 3.7, that Eq. (31) for the spring–mass system
         and Eqs. (32) or (33) for the electric circuit are identical mathematically, differing
         only in the interpretation of the constants and variables appearing in them. There
         are other physical problems that also lead to the same differential equation. Thus,
         once the mathematical problem is solved, its solution can be interpreted in terms of
         whichever corresponding physical problem is of immediate interest.
            In the problem lists following this and other sections in this chapter are numerous
         initial value problems for second order linear differential equations with constant
         coefficients. Many can be interpreted as models of particular physical systems, but
         usually we do not point this out explicitly.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 10, find the inverse Laplace transform of the given function.
                         3                                               4
          1. F(s) = 2                                     2. F(s) =
                      s +4                                           (s − 1)3
                            2                                             3s
          3. F(s) =                                       4. F(s) =
                      s2 + 3s − 4                                    s2 − s − 6
                         2s + 2                                      2s − 3
          5. F(s) = 2                                     6. F(s) = 2
                      s + 2s + 5                                     s −4
                         2s + 1                                      8s2 − 4s + 12
          7. F(s) =                                       8. F(s) =
                      s2 − 2s + 2                                       s(s2 + 4)
                         1 − 2s                                          2s − 3
          9. F(s) =                                      10. F(s) =
                      s2 + 4s + 5                                    s2 + 2s + 10
         In each of Problems 11 through 23, use the Laplace transform to solve the given initial value
         problem.
         11. y − y − 6y = 0;   y(0) = 1,   y (0) = −1
         12. y + 3y + 2y = 0;   y(0) = 1,   y (0) = 0
13. y − 2y + 2y = 0;        y(0) = 0,        y (0) = 1
           
14. y − 4y + 4y = 0;           y(0) = 1,        y (0) = 1
15. y − 2y + 4y = 0;        y(0) = 2,        y (0) = 0
16. y + 2y + 5y = 0;        y(0) = 2,        y (0) = −1
17. y(4) − 4y + 6y − 4y + y = 0;           y(0) = 0,            y (0) = 1,         y (0) = 0, y (0) = 1
      (4)                                                                     
18. y     − y = 0;      y(0) = 1,      y (0) = 0,          y (0) = 1,           y (0) = 0
      (4)                                                     
19. y     − 4y = 0;      y(0) = 1,      y (0) = 0,          y (0) = −2,              y (0) = 0
20. y + ω2 y = cos 2t,     ω2  = 4;        y(0) = 1,           y (0) = 0
                                                    
21. y − 2y + 2y = cos t;            y(0) = 1,        y (0) = 0
                     −t                          
22. y − 2y + 2y = e ;             y(0) = 0,        y (0) = 1
                     −t
23. y + 2y + y = 4e ;             y(0) = 2,        y (0) = −1
In each of Problems 24 through 27, find the Laplace transform Y(s) = L{y} of the solution of
the given initial value problem. A method of determining the inverse transform is developed
in Section 6.3. You may wish to refer to Problems 21 through 24 in Section 6.1.
                 
      
                   1, 0 ≤ t < π,
24. y + 4y =                                y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0
                   0, π ≤ t < ∞;
               
      
                 t, 0 ≤ t < 1,
25. y + y =                               y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0
                 0, 1 ≤ t < ∞;
                 
      
                   t, 0 ≤ t < 1,
26. y + 4y =                                y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0
                   1, 1 ≤ t < ∞;
               ⎧
               ⎪
               ⎨t,         0 ≤ t < 1,
      
27. y + y = 2 − t, 1 ≤ t < 2,                  y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0
               ⎪
               ⎩0,         2 ≤ t < ∞;
28. The Laplace transforms of certain functions can be found conveniently from their Taylor
    series expansions.
    (a) Using the Taylor series for sin t
                                                          ∞
                                                                  (−1)n t 2n+1
                                              sin t =                             ,
                                                          n=0
                                                                   (2n + 1)!
    and assuming that the Laplace transform of this series can be computed term by term,
    verify that
                                                               1
                                         L{sin t} = 2                 ,        s > 1.
                                                           s +1
    (b) Let
                                                      
                                                         (sin t)/t,       t  = 0,
                                           f (t) =
                                                         1,               t = 0.
    Find the Taylor series for f about t = 0. Assuming that the Laplace transform of this
    function can be computed term by term, verify that
                                      L{ f (t)} = arctan(1/s),                    s > 1.
     (c) The Bessel function of the first kind of order zero, J0 , has the Taylor series (see
     Section 5.7)
                                                     ∞
                                                         (−1)n t 2n
                                          J0 (t) =                  .
                                                    n=0
                                                         22n (n!)2
     Assuming that the following Laplace transforms can be computed term by term, verify
     that
                                   L{J0 (t)} = (s2 + 1)−1/2 ,          s>1
     and
                                        √
                                  L{J0 ( t)} = s−1 e−1/(4s) ,          s > 0.
Problems 29 through 37 are concerned with differentiation of the Laplace transform.
29. Let                                             ∞
                                         F(s) =         e−st f (t) dt.
                                                     0
     It is possible to show that as long as f satisfies the conditions of Theorem 6.1.2, it is
     legitimate to differentiate under the integral sign with respect to the parameter s when
     s > a.
     (a) Show that F  (s) = L{−tf (t)}.
     (b) Show that F (n) (s) = L{(−t)n f (t)}; hence differentiating the Laplace transform corre-
     sponds to multiplying the original function by −t.
In each of Problems 30 through 35, use the result of Problem 29 to find the Laplace transform
of the given function; a and b are real numbers and n is a positive integer.
30. f (t) = teat                                     31. f (t) = t 2 sin bt
32. f (t) = t n                                      33. f (t) = t n eat
34. f (t) = teat sin bt                              35. f (t) = teat cos bt
36. Consider Bessel’s equation of order zero
                                             ty + y + ty = 0.
     Recall from Section 5.7 that t = 0 is a regular singular point for this equation, and therefore
     solutions may become unbounded as t → 0. However,let us try to determine whether there
     are any solutions that remain finite at t = 0 and have finite derivatives there. Assuming
     that there is such a solution y = φ(t), let Y(s) = L{φ(t)}.
     (a) Show that Y(s) satisfies
                                       (1 + s2 )Y  (s) + sY(s) = 0.
     (b) Show that Y(s) = c(1 + s2 )−1/2 , where c is an arbitrary constant.
     (c) Writing (1 + s2 )−1/2 = s−1 (1 + s−2 )−1/2 , expanding in a binomial series valid for s > 1,
     and assuming that it is permissible to take the inverse transform term by term, show that
                                              ∞
                                                   (−1)n t 2n
                                      y=c                     = cJ0 (t),
                                              n=0
                                                   22n (n!)2
     where J0 is the Bessel function of the first kind of order zero. Note that J0 (0) = 1 and that
     J0 has finite derivatives of all orders at t = 0. It was shown in Section 5.7 that the second
     solution of this equation becomes unbounded as t → 0.
               37. For each of the following initial value problems, use the results of Problem 29 to find
                   the differential equation satisfied by Y(s) = L{φ(t)}, where y = φ(t) is the solution of the
                   given initial value problem.
                   (a) y − ty = 0;        y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0 (Airy’s equation)
                   (b) (1 − t 2 )y − 2ty + α(α + 1)y = 0;      y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1 (Legendre’s equation)
                   Note that the differential equation for Y(s) is of first order in part (a), but of second order
                   in part (b). This is due to the fact that t appears at most to the first power in the equation
                   of part (a), whereas it appears to the second power in that of part (b). This illustrates that
                   the Laplace transform is not often useful in solving differential equations with variable
                   coefficients, unless all the coefficients are at most linear functions of the independent
                   variable.
               38. Suppose that                                    t
                                                           g(t) =       f (τ) dτ.
                                                                    0
                   If G(s) and F(s) are the Laplace transforms of g(t) and f (t), respectively, show that
                                                            G(s) = F(s)/s.
               39. In this problem we show how a general partial fraction expansion can be used to calculate
                   many inverse Laplace transforms. Suppose that
                                                           F(s) = P(s)/Q(s),
                   where Q(s) is a polynomial of degree n with distinct zeros r1 , . . . , rn , and P(s) is a
                   polynomial of degree less than n. In this case it is possible to show that P(s)/Q(s) has
                   a partial fraction expansion of the form
                                                     P(s)      A1                   An
                                                           =         + ··· +              ,                     (i)
                                                     Q(s)    s − r1               s − rn
                   where the coefficients A1 , . . . , An must be determined.
                   (a) Show that
                                                 Ak = P(rk )/Q (rk ),         k = 1, . . . , n.               (ii)
                   Hint: One way to do this is to multiply Eq. (i) by s − rk and then to take the limit as s → rk .
                   (b) Show that
                                                                     n
                                                                           P(rk ) rk t
                                                      L−1 {F(s)} =            (r )
                                                                                    e .                       (iii)
                                                                    k=1
                                                                           Q     k
6.3 Step Functions
               In Section 6.2 we outlined the general procedure involved in solving initial value
               problems by means of the Laplace transform. Some of the most interesting elemen-
               tary applications of the transform method occur in the solution of linear differential
               equations with discontinuous or impulsive forcing functions. Equations of this type
               frequently arise in the analysis of the flow of current in electric circuits or the vibra-
               tions of mechanical systems. In this section and the following ones, we develop some
               additional properties of the Laplace transform that are useful in the solution of such
               problems. Unless a specific statement is made to the contrary, all functions appearing
        below will be assumed to be piecewise continuous and of exponential order, so that
        their Laplace transforms exist, at least for s sufficiently large.
           To deal effectively with functions having jump discontinuities, it is very helpful
        to introduce a function known as the unit step function or Heaviside function. This
        function will be denoted by uc and is defined by
                                                      
                                                        0, t < c,
                                             uc (t) =                                              (1)
                                                        1, t ≥ c.
        Since the Laplace transform involves values of t in the interval [0, ∞), we are also
        interested only in nonnegative values of c. The graph of y = uc (t) is shown in Figure
        6.3.1. We have somewhat arbitrarily assigned the value one to uc at t = c. However,
        for a piecewise continuous function such as uc , the value at a discontinuity point is
        usually irrelevant. The step can also be negative. For instance, Figure 6.3.2 shows the
        graph of y = 1 − uc (t).
         y                                                        y
         1                                                        1
                           c                  t                                     c                 t
        FIGURE 6.3.1      Graph of y = uc (t).                   FIGURE 6.3.2      Graph of y = 1−uc (t).
        Sketch the graph of y = h(t), where
EXAMPLE
                                        h(t) = uπ (t) − u2π (t),   t ≥ 0.
   1
           From the definition of uc (t) in Eq. (1), we have
                                             ⎧
                                             ⎪
                                             ⎨0 − 0 = 0, 0 ≤ t < π,
                                      h(t) = 1 − 0 = 1, π ≤ t < 2π,
                                             ⎪
                                             ⎩1 − 1 = 0, 2π ≤ t < ∞.
        Thus the equation y = h(t) has the graph shown in Figure 6.3.3. This function can be thought
        of as a rectangular pulse.
                                   y
                                   1
                                                 π          2π        3π       t
                                 FIGURE 6.3.3       Graph of y = uπ (t) − u2π (t).
        Consider the function                          ⎧
EXAMPLE                                                ⎪
                                                       ⎪     2,   0 ≤ t < 4,
                                                       ⎪
                                                       ⎨ 5,
   2                                                              4 ≤ t < 7,
                                             f (t) =                                                  (2)
                                                       ⎪
                                                       ⎪  −1,     7 ≤ t < 9,
                                                       ⎪
                                                       ⎩
                                                             1,   t ≥ 9,
        whose graph is shown in Figure 6.3.4. Express f (t) in terms of uc (t).
                             y
                             5
                             4
                             3
                             2
                             1
                                      2            4           6         8        10      12 t
                            –1
                               FIGURE 6.3.4          Graph of the function in Eq. (2).
           We start with the function f1 (t) = 2, which agrees with f (t) on [0, 4). To produce the jump
        of three units at t = 4, we add 3u4 (t) to f1 (t), obtaining
                                                   f2 (t) = 2 + 3u4 (t),
        which agrees with f (t) on [0, 7). The negative jump of six units at t = 7 corresponds to
        adding −6u7 (t), which gives
                                             f3 (t) = 2 + 3u4 (t) − 6u7 (t).
        Finally, we must add 2u9 (t) to match the jump of two units at t = 9. Thus we obtain
                                       f (t) = 2 + 3u4 (t) − 6u7 (t) + 2u9 (t).                       (3)
           The Laplace transform of uc for c ≥ 0 is easily determined:
                                                   ∞                         ∞
                                  L{uc (t)} =            e−st uc (t) dt =         e−st dt
                                                    0                         c
                                                    −cs
                                                  e
                                              =          ,        s > 0.                              (4)
                                                     s
           For a given function f defined for t ≥ 0, we will often want to consider the related
        function g defined by
                                                           
                                                             0,            t < c,
                                        y = g(t) =
                                                             f (t − c), t ≥ c,
              which represents a translation of f a distance c in the positive t direction; see Fig-
              ure 6.3.5. In terms of the unit step function we can write g(t) in the convenient
              form
                                                     g(t) = uc (t)f (t − c).
                   y                                                y
               f (0)                                            f (0)
                                                         t                       c                           t
                                 (a)                                                       (b)
                   FIGURE 6.3.5 A translation of the given function. (a) y = f (t); (b) y = uc (t)f (t − c).
                  The unit step function is particularly important in transform use because of the fol-
              lowing relation between the transform of f (t) and that of its translation uc (t)f (t − c).
Theorem 6.3.1 If F(s) = L{ f (t)} exists for s > a ≥ 0, and if c is a positive constant, then
                               L{uc (t)f (t − c)} = e−cs L{f (t)} = e−cs F(s),               s > a.       (5)
                                          −1
              Conversely, if f (t) = L {F(s)}, then
                                              uc (t)f (t − c) = L−1 {e−cs F(s)}.                          (6)
                  Theorem 6.3.1 simply states that the translation of f (t) a distance c in the positive
              t direction corresponds to the multiplication of F(s) by e−cs . To prove Theorem 6.3.1,
              it is sufficient to compute the transform of uc (t)f (t − c):
                                                                 ∞
                                        L{uc (t)f (t − c)} =           e−st uc (t)f (t − c) dt
                                                                  0
                                                                 ∞
                                                             =         e−st f (t − c) dt.
                                                                  c
              Introducing a new integration variable ξ = t − c, we have
                                                     ∞                                 ∞
                                                            −(ξ+c)s                −cs
                             L{uc (t)f (t − c)} =         e         f (ξ) dξ = e            e−sξ f (ξ) dξ
                                                      0                                 0
                                                     −cs
                                                =e       F(s).
              Thus Eq. (5) is established; Eq. (6) follows by taking the inverse transform of both
              sides of Eq. (5).
                  A simple example of this theorem occurs if we take f (t) = 1. Recalling that
              L{1} = 1/s, we immediately have from Eq. (5) that L{uc (t)} = e−cs /s. This result
              agrees with that of Eq. (4). Examples 3 and 4 illustrate further how Theorem 6.3.1
              can be used in the calculation of transforms and inverse transforms.
        If the function f is defined by
EXAMPLE                                     
                                              sin t,                        0 ≤ t < π/4,
   3                               f (t) =
                                              sin t + cos(t − π/4),         t ≥ π/4,
        find L{ f (t)}. The graph of y = f (t) is shown in Figure 6.3.6.
                               y
                               2
                               1
                             0.5                    y = sin t + uπ /4(t)cos(t – 4π )
                                                  π
                                          0.5     4
                                                       1        1.5          2        2.5    3 t
                              FIGURE 6.3.6          Graph of the function in Example 3.
           Note that f (t) = sin t + g(t), where
                                                    
                                                      0,                 t < π/4,
                                          g(t) =
                                                      cos(t − π/4),      t ≥ π/4.
        Thus
                                               g(t) = uπ/4 (t) cos(t − π/4)
        and
                                    L{ f (t)} = L{sin t} + L{uπ/4 (t) cos(t − π/4)}
                                              = L{sin t} + e−πs/4 L{cos t}.
           Introducing the transforms of sin t and cos t, we obtain
                                                   1         −πs/4     s       1 + se−πs/4
                                  L{ f (t)} =            + e                 =             .
                                                s2 + 1             s2 + 1         s2 + 1
        You should compare this method with the calculation of L{ f (t)} directly from the definition.
        Find the inverse transform of
EXAMPLE                                                        1 − e−2s
                                                     F(s) =               .
   4                                                               s2
           From the linearity of the inverse transform, we have
                                                                                 −2s 
                                                                     1               e
                                   f (t) = L−1 {F(s)} = L−1 2 − L−1
                                                                     s                s2
                                         = t − u2 (t)(t − 2).
              The function f may also be written as
                                                            
                                                              t,    0 ≤ t < 2,
                                                   f (t) =
                                                              2,    t ≥ 2.
                 The following theorem contains another very useful property of Laplace trans-
              forms that is somewhat analogous to that given in Theorem 6.3.1.
Theorem 6.3.2 If F(s) = L{ f (t)} exists for s > a ≥ 0, and if c is a constant, then
                                         L{ect f (t)} = F(s − c),           s > a + c.                  (7)
              Conversely, if f (t) = L−1 {F(s)}, then
                                                 ect f (t) = L−1 {F(s − c)}.                            (8)
                 According to Theorem 6.3.2, multiplication of f (t) by ect results in a translation of
              the transform F(s) a distance c in the positive s direction, and conversely. To prove
              this theorem, we evaluate L{ect f (t)}. Thus
                                                  ∞                         ∞
                                                         −st ct
                                  L{e f (t)} =
                                     ct
                                                        e e f (t) dt =           e−(s−c)t f (t) dt
                                                   0                         0
                                             = F(s − c),
              which is Eq. (7). The restriction s > a + c follows from the observation that, according
              to hypothesis (ii) of Theorem 6.1.2, | f (t)| ≤ Keat ; hence |ect f (t)| ≤ Ke(a+c)t . Equation
              (8) is obtained by taking the inverse transform of Eq. (7), and the proof is complete.
                 The principal application of Theorem 6.3.2 is in the evaluation of certain inverse
              transforms, as illustrated by Example 5.
              Find the inverse transform of
 EXAMPLE                                                               1
                                                       G(s) =                .
      5                                                          s2 − 4s + 5
                 By completing the square in the denominator, we can write
                                                                1
                                              G(s) =                     = F(s − 2),
                                                         (s − 2)2 + 1
              where F(s) = (s2 + 1)−1 . Since L−1 {F(s)} = sin t, it follows from Theorem 6.3.2 that
                                                 g(t) = L−1 {G(s)} = e2t sin t.
                 The results of this section are often useful in solving differential equations, partic-
              ularly those that have discontinuous forcing functions. The next section is devoted to
              examples illustrating this fact.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, sketch the graph of the given function on the interval t ≥ 0.
          1. g(t) = u1 (t) + 2u3 (t) − 6u4 (t)                   2. g(t) = (t − 3)u2 (t) − (t − 2)u3 (t)
          3. g(t) = f (t − π)uπ (t),       where f (t) = t 2     4. g(t) = f (t − 3)u3 (t),    where f (t) = sin t
          5. g(t) = f (t − 1)u2 (t),     where f (t) = 2t
          6. g(t) = (t − 1)u1 (t) − 2(t − 2)u2 (t) + (t − 3)u3 (t)
         In each of Problems 7 through 12:
         (a) Sketch the graph of the given function.
         (b) Express f (t) in terms of the unit step function uc (t).
                                                                            ⎧
                     ⎧                                                      ⎪    1,    0 ≤ t < 1,
                                 0 ≤ t < 3,                                 ⎪
                                                                            ⎪
                     ⎪
                     ⎪
                           0,                                               ⎪
                                                                            ⎪
                     ⎪
                     ⎨−2,        3 ≤ t < 5,                                 ⎨−1,
                                                                            ⎪          1 ≤ t < 2,
          7. f (t) =                                             8. f (t) =      1, 2 ≤ t < 3,
                     ⎪
                     ⎪ 2,        5 ≤ t < 7,                                 ⎪
                                                                            ⎪
                     ⎪
                     ⎩                                                      ⎪
                                                                            ⎪
                           1,    t ≥ 7.                                     ⎪−1, 3 ≤ t < 4,
                                                                            ⎪
                                                                            ⎩
                                                                                 0, t ≥ 4.
                                                                           
                       1,            0 ≤ t < 2,                               t , 0 ≤ t < 2,
                                                                               2
          9. f (t) =     −(t−2)
                                                               10. f (t) =
                       e        , t ≥ 2.                                      1, t ≥ 2.
                     ⎧                                                       ⎧
                     ⎪
                     ⎪  t,         0 ≤ t < 1,                                ⎪
                                                                             ⎪ t,        0 ≤ t < 2,
                     ⎪
                     ⎪                                                       ⎪
                                                                             ⎪
                     ⎨t − 1, 1 ≤ t < 2,                                      ⎨2,         2 ≤ t < 5,
         11. f (t) =                                            12. f (t) =
                     ⎪
                     ⎪  t − 2, 2 ≤ t < 3,                                    ⎪
                                                                             ⎪ 7 − t, 5 ≤ t < 7,
                     ⎪
                     ⎪                                                       ⎪
                                                                             ⎪
                     ⎩                                                       ⎩
                        0,         t ≥ 3.                                      0,        t ≥ 7.
         In each of Problems 13 through 18, find the Laplace transform of the given function.
                                                                           
                       0,             t<2                                     0,              t<1
         13. f (t) =                                            14. f (t) = 2
                       (t − 2)2 , t ≥ 2                                       t − 2t + 2, t ≥ 1
                     ⎧
                     ⎪
                     ⎨0,           t<π
         15. f (t) = t − π, π ≤ t < 2π                          16. f (t) = u1 (t) + 2u3 (t) − 6u4 (t)
                     ⎪
                     ⎩
                        0,         t ≥ 2π
         17. f (t) = (t − 3)u2 (t) − (t − 2)u3 (t)              18. f (t) = t − u1 (t)(t − 1),      t≥0
         In each of Problems 19 through 24, find the inverse Laplace transform of the given function.
                           3!                                                     e−2s
         19. F(s) =                                             20. F(s) =
                      (s − 2)4                                               s2 + s − 2
                      2(s − 1)e−2s                                            2e−2s
         21. F(s) =                                             22. F(s) =
                       s2 − 2s + 2                                           s2 − 4
                       (s − 2)e−s                                            e−s + e−2s − e−3s − e−4s
         23. F(s) =                                             24. F(s) =
                      s2 − 4s + 3                                                          s
         25. Suppose that F(s) = L{ f (t)} exists for s > a ≥ 0.
             (a) Show that if c is a positive constant, then
                                                             1     s
                                                L{ f (ct)} =   F       ,     s > ca.
                                                             c     c
     (b) Show that if k is a positive constant, then
                                                                 
                                                            1      t
                                           L−1 {F(ks)} =       f         .
                                                            k      k
     (c) Show that if a and b are constants with a > 0, then
                                                                        
                                                           1 −bt/a          t
                                      L−1 {F(as + b)} =       e      f          .
                                                           a                a
In each of Problems 26 through 29, use the results of Problem 25 to find the inverse Laplace
transform of the given function.
              2n+1 n!                                                        2s + 1
26. F(s) = n+1                                        27. F(s) = 2
               s                                                       4s + 4s + 5
                     1                                                 e2 e−4s
28. F(s) = 2                                          29. F(s) =
              9s − 12s + 3                                             2s − 1
In each of Problems 30 through 33, find the Laplace transform of the given function. In
Problem 33, assume that term-by-term integration of the infinite series is permissible.
                                                                     ⎧
                                                                    ⎪1, 0 ≤ t < 1
                                                                     ⎪
                                                                     ⎪
                                                                     ⎨0, 1 ≤ t < 2
               1, 0 ≤ t < 1
30. f (t) =                                           31. f (t) =
               0, t ≥ 1                                              ⎪1, 2 ≤ t < 3
                                                                     ⎪
                                                                     ⎪
                                                                     ⎩
                                                                        0, t ≥ 3
                                                            
                                                            2n+1
32. f (t) = 1 − u1 (t) + · · · + u2n (t) − u2n+1 (t) = 1 +       (−1)k uk (t)
                                                            k=1
                  ∞
33. f (t) = 1 +       (−1)k uk (t).    See Figure 6.3.7.
                  k=1
                           y
                           1
                                       1        2        3         4            5   t
                 FIGURE 6.3.7 The function f (t) in Problem 33; a square wave.
34. Let f satisfy f (t + T) = f (t) for all t ≥ 0 and for some fixed positive number T; f is said
     to be periodic with period T on 0 ≤ t < ∞. Show that
                                                       T
                                                           e−st f (t) dt
                                          L{ f (t)} = 0                    .
                                                          1 − e−sT
In each of Problems 35 through 38, use the result of Problem 34 to find the Laplace transform
of the given function.
                                                                    
               1, 0 ≤ t < 1,                                               1, 0 ≤ t < 1,
35. f (t) =                                           36. f (t) =
               0, 1 ≤ t < 2;                                            −1, 1 ≤ t < 2;
     f (t + 2) = f (t).                                    f (t + 2) = f (t).
     Compare with Problem 33.                              See Figure 6.3.8.
                               y
                               1
                                        1       2        3         4         5
                                                                                   t
                             –1
               FIGURE 6.3.8 The function f (t) in Problem 36; a square wave.
37. f (t) = t,     0 ≤ t < 1;                         38. f (t) = sin t,       0 ≤ t < π;
    f (t + 1) = f (t).                                     f (t + π) = f (t).
    See Figure 6.3.9.                                      See Figure 6.3.10.
 y                                                           y
 1
                                                             1
            1       2           3        4       t                          π         2π       3π   t
  FIGURE 6.3.9 The function f (t) in                          FIGURE 6.3.10 The function f (t) in
       Problem 37; a sawtooth wave.                               Problem 38; a rectified sine wave.
39. (a) If f (t) = 1 − u1 (t), find L{ f (t)}; compare with Problem 30. Sketch the graph of
    y = f (t).
                        t
    (b) Let g(t) =         f (ξ) dξ, where the function f is defined in part (a). Sketch the graph of
                        0
    y = g(t) and find L{g(t)}.
    (c) Let h(t) = g(t) − u1 (t)g(t − 1), where g is defined in part (b). Sketch the graph of
    y = h(t) and find L{h(t)}.
40. Consider the function p defined by
                                      
                                        t,      0 ≤ t < 1,
                              p(t) =                                 p(t + 2) = p(t).
                                        2 − t, 1 ≤ t < 2;
    (a) Sketch the graph of y = p(t).
    (b) Find L{p(t)} by noting that p is the periodic extension of the function h in
    Problem 39(c) and then using the result of Problem 34.
    (c) Find L{p(t)} by noting that
                                                       t
                                               p(t) =      f (t) dt,
                                                        0
    where f is the function in Problem 36, and then using Theorem 6.2.1.
6.4 Differential Equations with Discontinuous Forcing Functions
                In this section we turn our attention to some examples in which the nonhomogeneous
                term, or forcing function, is discontinuous.
                Find the solution of the differential equation
   EXAMPLE
                                                           2y + y + 2y = g(t),                                   (1)
      1
                where                                              
                                                                     1,   5 ≤ t < 20,
                                     g(t) = u5 (t) − u20 (t) =                                                      (2)
                                                                     0,   0 ≤ t < 5 and t ≥ 20.
                Assume that the initial conditions are
                                                         y(0) = 0,         y (0) = 0.                              (3)
                  This problem governs the charge on the capacitor in a simple electric circuit with a unit
                voltage pulse for 5 ≤ t < 20. Alternatively, y may represent the response of a damped oscillator
                subject to the applied force g(t).
                  The Laplace transform of Eq. (1) is
                            2s2 Y(s) − 2sy(0) − 2y (0) + sY(s) − y(0) + 2Y(s) = L{u5 (t)} − L{u20 (t)}
                                                                                           = (e−5s − e−20s )/s.
                Introducing the initial values (3) and solving for Y(s), we obtain
                                                                      e−5s − e−20s
                                                          Y(s) =                       .                            (4)
                                                                    s(2s2 + s + 2)
                To find y = φ(t), it is convenient to write Y(s) as
                                                      Y(s) = (e−5s − e−20s )H(s),                                   (5)
                where
                                                                            1
                                                         H(s) =                        .                            (6)
                                                                     s(2s2 + s + 2)
                Then, if h(t) = L−1 {H(s)}, we have
                                            y = φ(t) = u5 (t)h(t − 5) − u20 (t)h(t − 20).                           (7)
                Observe that we have used Theorem 6.3.1 to write the inverse transforms of e−5s H(s) and
                e−20s H(s), respectively. Finally, to determine h(t), we use the partial fraction expansion of
                H(s):
                                                                   a        bs + c
                                                       H(s) = + 2                        .                          (8)
                                                                   s     2s + s + 2
                Upon determining the coefficients, we find that a = 21 , b = −1, and c = − 21 . Thus
                                                                                          
                                      1/2         s + 21          1/2        1       s + 41 + 41
                             H(s) =        − 2                =         −                 2
                                        s    2s + s + 2             s        2      s + 41 + 1516
                                                    ⎡                                                           ⎤
                                                                                                √
                                      1/2       1 ⎢             s + 41                 1            15/4        ⎥
                                   =       −        ⎣                 √      2
                                                                                 +√                    √   2⎦
                                                                                                                  . (9)
                                        s       2                2                     15 s + 1 + 15
                                                                                                   2
                                                         s + 14 + 415                           4         4
Then, by referring to lines 9 and 10 of Table 6.2.1, we obtain
                                        √             √                 √        
                h(t) = 21 − 21 e−t/4 cos( 15 t/4) + ( 15/15)e−t/4 sin( 15 t/4) .                (10)
   In Figure 6.4.1 the graph of y = φ(t) from Eqs. (7) and (10) shows that the solution consists
of three distinct parts. For 0 < t < 5, the differential equation is
                                         2y + y + 2y = 0,                                    (11)
and the initial conditions are given by Eq. (3). Since the initial conditions impart no energy
to the system, and since there is no external forcing, the system remains at rest; that is, y = 0
for 0 < t < 5. This can be confirmed by solving Eq. (11) subject to the initial conditions (3). In
particular, evaluating the solution and its derivative at t = 5, or, more precisely, as t approaches
5 from below, we have
                                      y(5) = 0,      y (5) = 0.                                (12)
Once t > 5, the differential equation becomes
                                         2y + y + 2y = 1,                                    (13)
whose solution is the sum of a constant (the response to the constant forcing function) and
a damped oscillation (the solution of the corresponding homogeneous equation). The plot
in Figure 6.4.1 shows this behavior clearly for the interval 5 ≤ t ≤ 20. An expression for this
portion of the solution can be found by solving the differential equation (13) subject to the
initial conditions (12). Finally, for t > 20 the differential equation becomes Eq. (11) again,
and the initial conditions are obtained by evaluating the solution of Eqs. (13), (12) and its
derivative at t = 20. These values are
                              y(20) ∼
                                    = 0.50162,       y (20) ∼
                                                             = 0.01125.                         (14)
The initial value problem (11), (14) contains no external forcing, so its solution is a damped
oscillation about y = 0, as can be seen in Figure 6.4.1.
                  y
                0.8
                0.6
                0.4
                0.2
                                  10              20             30            40
                                                                                       t
              –0.2
               FIGURE 6.4.1 Solution of the initial value problem (1), (2), (3):
                      2y + y + 2y = u5 (t) − u20 (t), y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0.
           Although it may be helpful to visualize the solution shown in Figure 6.4.1 as composed of
        solutions of three separate initial value problems in three separate intervals, it is somewhat
        tedious to find the solution by solving these separate problems. Laplace transform methods
        provide a much more convenient and elegant approach to this problem and to others that
        have discontinuous forcing functions.
           The effect of the discontinuity in the forcing function can be seen if we examine the
        solution φ(t) of Example 1 more closely. According to the existence and uniqueness
        Theorem 3.2.1, the solution φ and its first two derivatives are continuous except
        possibly at the points t = 5 and t = 20, where g is discontinuous. This can also be
        seen at once from Eq. (7). One can also show by direct computation from Eq. (7)
        that φ and φ are continuous even at t = 5 and t = 20. However, if we calculate φ ,
        we find that
                                    lim φ (t) = 0,        lim φ (t) = 1/2.
                                   t→5−                    t→5+
        Consequently, φ (t) has a jump of 1/2 at t = 5. In a similar way, we can show that
        φ (t) has a jump of −1/2 at t = 20. Thus the jump in the forcing term g(t) at these
        points is balanced by a corresponding jump in the highest order term 2y on the left
        side of the equation.
            Consider now the general second order linear equation
                                          y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),                            (15)
        where p and q are continuous on some interval α < t < β, but g is only piecewise
        continuous there. If y = ψ(t) is a solution of Eq. (15), then ψ and ψ are continuous
        on α < t < β, but ψ has jump discontinuities at the same points as g. Similar remarks
        apply to higher order equations; the highest derivative of the solution appearing in
        the differential equation has jump discontinuities at the same points as the forcing
        function, but the solution itself and its lower derivatives are continuous even at those
        points.
        Describe the qualitative nature of the solution of the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                                 y + 4y = g(t),                                  (16)
   2
                                             y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 0,                            (17)
        where
                                               ⎧
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎨0,             0 ≤ t < 5,
                                       g(t) = (t − 5)/5,       5 ≤ t < 10,                         (18)
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎩1,             t ≥ 10,
        and then find the solution.
            In this example the forcing function has the graph shown in Figure 6.4.2 and is known as
        ramp loading. It is relatively easy to identify the general form of the solution. For t < 5 the
        solution is simply y = 0. On the other hand, for t > 10 the solution has the form
                                         y = c1 cos 2t + c2 sin 2t + 1/4.                          (19)
The constant 1/4 is a particular solution of the nonhomogeneous equation, while the other
two terms are the general solution of the corresponding homogeneous equation. Thus the
solution (19) is a simple harmonic oscillation about y = 1/4. Similarly, in the intermediate
range 5 < t < 10, the solution is an oscillation about a certain linear function. In an engineering
context, for example, we might be interested in knowing the amplitude of the eventual steady
oscillation.
                              y
                              1
                                                   y = g(t)
                            0.5
                                         5         10         15    20 t
              FIGURE 6.4.2      Ramp loading; y = g(t) from Eq. (18) or Eq. (20).
   To solve the problem, it is convenient to write
                                                                   
                             g(t) = u5 (t)(t − 5) − u10 (t)(t − 10) /5,                        (20)
as you may verify. Then we take the Laplace transform of the differential equation and use
the initial conditions, thereby obtaining
                                 (s2 + 4)Y(s) = (e−5s − e−10s )/5s2
or
                                   Y(s) = (e−5s − e−10s )H(s)/5,                               (21)
where
                                                          1
                                         H(s) =                 .                              (22)
                                                    s2 (s2 + 4)
Thus the solution of the initial value problem (16), (17), (18) is
                                                                      
                          y = φ(t) = u5 (t)h(t − 5) − u10 (t)h(t − 10) /5,                     (23)
where h(t) is the inverse transform of H(s). The partial fraction expansion of H(s) is
                                                1/4         1/4
                                        H(s) =          − 2       ,                            (24)
                                                  s2       s +4
and it then follows from lines 3 and 5 of Table 6.2.1 that
                                         h(t) = 14 t − 18 sin 2t.                              (25)
The graph of y = φ(t) is shown in Figure 6.4.3. Observe that it has the qualitative form that
we indicated earlier. To find the amplitude of the eventual steady oscillation, it is sufficient to
locate one of the maximum or minimum points for t > 10. Setting the derivative of the solution
(23) equal to zero, we find that the first maximum is located approximately at (10.642, 0.2979),
so the amplitude of the oscillation is approximately 0.0479.
                              y
                           0.30
                           0.20
                           0.10
                                                5               10                  15              20   t
                          FIGURE 6.4.3       Solution of the initial value problem (16), (17), (18).
             Note that in this example, the forcing function g is continuous but g  is discontinuous at
         t = 5 and t = 10. It follows that the solution φ and its first two derivatives are continuous
         everywhere, but φ has discontinuities at t = 5 and at t = 10 that match the discontinuities in
         g  at those points.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 13:
         (a) Find the solution of the given initial value problem.
         (b) Draw the graphs of the solution and of the forcing function; explain how they are related.
                                                                              
                                                  
                                                                                 1, 0 ≤ t < 3π
           1. y + y = f (t);        y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1;             f (t) =
                                                                                 0, 3π ≤ t < ∞
                                                                                       
                                                          
                                                                                         1, π ≤ t < 2π
           2. y + 2y + 2y = h(t);             y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1;            h(t) =
                                                                                         0, 0 ≤ t < π and t ≥ 2π
           3. y + 4y = sin t − u2π (t) sin(t − 2π);          y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 0
                                                                          
           4. y + 4y = sin t + uπ (t) sin(t − π);           y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 0
                                                                                       
                                                         
                                                                                         1,   0 ≤ t < 10
           5. y + 3y + 2y = f (t);           y(0) = 0,     y (0) = 0;         f (t) =
                                                                                         0,   t ≥ 10
           6. y + 3y + 2y = u2 (t);         y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 1
                                                     
           7. y + y = u3π (t);         y(0) = 1,      y (0) = 0
                     
           8. y     + y + 54 y = t − uπ/2 (t)(t − π/2);        y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 0
                                                                              
                                                  
                                                                                 t/2, 0 ≤ t < 6
           9. y + y = g(t);          y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1;            g(t) =
                                                                                 3,     t≥6
                                                                                      
                                                                                        sin t, 0 ≤ t < π
         10. y + y + 54 y = g(t);        y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0;           g(t) =
                                                                                        0,      t≥π
         11. y + 4y = uπ (t) − u3π (t);         y(0) = 0,     y (0) = 0
12. y(4) − y = u1 (t) − u2 (t);       y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0,   y (0) = 0,      y (0) = 0
      (4)                                                             
13. y     + 5y + 4y = 1 − uπ (t);         y(0) = 0,     y (0) = 0,     y (0) = 0,        y (0) = 0
14. Find an expression involving uc (t) for a function f that ramps up from zero at t = t0 to the
    value h at t = t0 + k.
15. Find an expression involving uc (t) for a function g that ramps up from zero at t = t0 to the
    value h at t = t0 + k and then ramps back down to zero at t = t0 + 2k.
16. A certain spring–mass system satisfies the initial value problem
                            u + 41 u + u = kg(t),        u(0) = 0,       u (0) = 0,
    where g(t) = u3/2 (t) − u5/2 (t) and k > 0 is a parameter.
    (a) Sketch the graph of g(t). Observe that it is a pulse of unit magnitude extending over
    one time unit.
    (b) Solve the initial value problem.
    (c) Plot the solution for k = 1/2, k = 1, and k = 2. Describe the principal features of the
    solution and how they depend on k.
    (d) Find, to two decimal places, the smallest value of k for which the solution u(t) reaches
    the value 2.
    (e) Suppose k = 2. Find the time τ after which |u(t)| < 0.1 for all t > τ.
17. Modify the problem in Example 2 of this section by replacing the given forcing function
    g(t) by
                                                                                
                               f (t) = u5 (t)(t − 5) − u5+k (t)(t − 5 − k) /k.
    (a) Sketch the graph of f (t) and describe how it depends on k. For what value of k is f (t)
    identical to g(t) in the example?
    (b) Solve the initial value problem
                                 y + 4y = f (t),      y(0) = 0,     y (0) = 0.
    (c) The solution in part (b) depends on k, but for sufficiently large t the solution is always
    a simple harmonic oscillation about y = 1/4. Try to decide how the amplitude of this
    eventual oscillation depends on k. Then confirm your conclusion by plotting the solution
    for a few different values of k.
18. Consider the initial value problem
                            y + 13 y + 4y = fk (t),      y(0) = 0,       y (0) = 0,
    where
                                     
                                       1/2k,   4−k ≤t <4+k
                          fk (t) =
                                       0,      0 ≤ t < 4 − k and            t ≥4+k
    and 0 < k < 4.
    (a) Sketch the graph of fk (t). Observe that the area under the graph is independent of k.
    If fk (t) represents a force, this means that the product of the magnitude of the force and
    the time interval during which it acts does not depend on k.
    (b) Write fk (t) in terms of the unit step function and then solve the given initial value
    problem.
    (c) Plot the solution for k = 2, k = 1, and k = 21 . Describe how the solution depends on k.
    Resonance and Beats. In Section 3.8 we observed that an undamped harmonic oscillator
    (such as a spring–mass system) with a sinusoidal forcing term experiences resonance if the
    frequency of the forcing term is the same as the natural frequency. If the forcing frequency
    is slightly different from the natural frequency, then the system exhibits a beat. In Problems
    19 through 23 we explore the effect of some nonsinusoidal periodic forcing functions.
19. Consider the initial value problem
                                 y + y = f (t),      y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0,
    where
                                                         n
                                      f (t) = u0 (t) + 2     (−1)k ukπ (t).
                                                         k=1
    (a) Draw the graph of f (t) on an interval such as 0 ≤ t ≤ 6π.
    (b) Find the solution of the initial value problem.
    (c) Let n = 15 and plot the graph of the solution for 0 ≤ t ≤ 60. Describe the solution
    and explain why it behaves as it does.
    (d) Investigate how the solution changes as n increases. What happens as n → ∞?
20. Consider the initial value problem
                            y + 0.1y + y = f (t),        y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0,
    where f (t) is the same as in Problem 19.
    (a) Plot the graph of the solution. Use a large enough value of n and a long enough
    t-interval so that the transient part of the solution has become negligible and the steady
    state is clearly shown.
    (b) Estimate the amplitude and frequency of the steady state part of the solution.
    (c) Compare the results of part (b) with those from Section 3.8 for a sinusoidally forced
    oscillator.
21. Consider the initial value problem
                                 y + y = g(t),       y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0,
    where
                                                        n
                                       g(t) = u0 (t) +      (−1)k ukπ (t).
                                                        k=1
    (a) Draw the graph of g(t) on an interval such as 0 ≤ t ≤ 6π. Compare the graph with
    that of f (t) in Problem 19(a).
    (b) Find the solution of the initial value problem.
    (c) Let n = 15 and plot the graph of the solution for 0 ≤ t ≤ 60. Describe the solution
    and explain why it behaves as it does. Compare it with the solution of Problem 19.
    (d) Investigate how the solution changes as n increases. What happens as n → ∞?
22. Consider the initial value problem
                            y + 0.1y + y = g(t),         y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0,
    where g(t) is the same as in Problem 21.
    (a) Plot the graph of the solution. Use a large enough value of n and a long enough t-
    interval so that the transient part of the solution has become negligible and the steady
    state is clearly shown.
    (b) Estimate the amplitude and frequency of the steady state part of the solution.
                    (c) Compare the results of part (b) with those from Problem 20 and from Section 3.8 for
                    a sinusoidally forced oscillator.
               23. Consider the initial value problem
                                               y + y = h(t),        y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0,
                    where
                                                                       n
                                                   f (t) = u0 (t) + 2      (−1)k u11k/4 (t).
                                                                       k=1
                    Observe that this problem is identical to Problem 19 except that the frequency of the
                    forcing term has been increased somewhat.
                    (a) Find the solution of this initial value problem.
                    (b) Let n ≥ 33 and plot the solution for 0 ≤ t ≤ 90 or longer. Your plot should show a
                    clearly recognizable beat.
                    (c) From the graph in part (b), estimate the “slow period” and the “fast period” for this
                    oscillator.
                    (d) For a sinusoidally forced oscillator, it was shown in Section 3.8 that the “slow fre-
                    quency” is given by |ω − ω0 |/2, where ω0 is the natural frequency of the system and ω is
                    the forcing frequency. Similarly, the “fast frequency” is (ω + ω0 )/2. Use these expressions
                    to calculate the “fast period” and the “slow period” for the oscillator in this problem. How
                    well do the results compare with your estimates from part (c)?
6.5 Impulse Functions
               In some applications it is necessary to deal with phenomena of an impulsive nature—
               for example, voltages or forces of large magnitude that act over very short time
               intervals. Such problems often lead to differential equations of the form
                                                       ay + by + cy = g(t),                                (1)
               where g(t) is large during a short interval t0 − τ < t < t0 + τ for some τ > 0, and is
               otherwise zero.
                  The integral I(τ), defined by
                                                                  t0 +τ
                                                        I(τ) =            g(t) dt,                            (2)
                                                                  t0 −τ
               or, since g(t) = 0 outside of the interval (t0 − τ, t0 + τ), by
                                                                   ∞
                                                         I(τ) =         g(t) dt,                              (3)
                                                                   −∞
               is a measure of the strength of the forcing function. In a mechanical system, where
               g(t) is a force, I(τ) is the total impulse of the force g(t) over the time interval
               (t0 − τ, t0 + τ). Similarly, if y is the current in an electric circuit and g(t) is the time
               derivative of the voltage, then I(τ) represents the total voltage impressed on the
               circuit during the interval (t0 − τ, t0 + τ).
   In particular, let us suppose that t0 is zero and that g(t) is given by
                                     
                                        1/(2τ), −τ < t < τ,
                    g(t) = dτ (t) =                                                  (4)
                                        0,           t ≤ −τ or t ≥ τ,
where τ is a small positive constant (see Figure 6.5.1). According to Eq. (2) or (3),
it follows immediately that in this case, I(τ) = 1 independent of the value of τ,
as long as τ  = 0. Now let us idealize the forcing function dτ by prescribing it to act
over shorter and shorter time intervals; that is, we require that τ → 0+ , as indicated
in Figure 6.5.2. As a result of this limiting operation, we obtain
                                  lim dτ (t) = 0,          t  = 0.                  (5)
                                 τ→0+
Further, since I(τ) = 1 for each τ  = 0, it follows that
                                          lim I(τ) = 1.                              (6)
                                         τ→0+
                                              y
                                             1
                                             2τ
                                      τ                      τ      t
                            FIGURE 6.5.1        Graph of y = dτ (t).
                                              y
                                                                       t
                       FIGURE 6.5.2       Graphs of y = dτ (t) as τ → 0+ .
   Equations (5) and (6) can be used to define an idealized unit impulse function δ,
which imparts an impulse of magnitude one at t = 0 but is zero for all values of t
other than zero. That is, the “function” δ is defined to have the properties
                                     δ(t) = 0,        t  = 0;                       (7)
                                         ∞
                                             δ(t) dt = 1.                            (8)
                                         −∞
There is no ordinary function of the kind studied in elementary calculus that satisfies
both Eqs. (7) and (8). The “function” δ, defined by those equations, is an example of
what are known as generalized functions; it is usually called the Dirac3 delta function.
Since δ(t) corresponds to a unit impulse at t = 0, a unit impulse at an arbitrary point
t = t0 is given by δ(t − t0 ). From Eqs. (7) and (8), it follows that
                                        δ(t − t0 ) = 0,          t  = t0 ;                            (9)
                                           ∞
                                                δ(t − t0 ) dt = 1.                                    (10)
                                            −∞
   The delta function does not satisfy the conditions of Theorem 6.1.2, but its Laplace
transform can nevertheless be formally defined. Since δ(t) is defined as the limit
of dτ (t) as τ → 0+ , it is natural to define the Laplace transform of δ as a similar
limit of the transform of dτ . In particular, we will assume that t0 > 0 and will define
L{δ(t − t0 )} by the equation
                                   L{δ(t − t0 )} = lim L{dτ (t − t0 )}.                               (11)
                                                      τ→0+
To evaluate the limit in Eq. (11), we first observe that if τ < t0 , which must eventually
be the case as τ → 0+ , then t0 − τ > 0. Since dτ (t − t0 ) is nonzero only in the interval
from t0 − τ to t0 + τ, we have
                                                     ∞
                               L{dτ (t − t0 )} =           e−st dτ (t − t0 ) dt
                                                     0
                                                     t0 +τ
                                                =            e−st dτ (t − t0 ) dt.
                                                     t0 −τ
Substituting for dτ (t − t0 ) from Eq. (4), we obtain
                                                t0 +τ
                                             1                              1 −st t=t0 +τ
                       L{dτ (t − t0 )} =                 e−st dt = −          e 
                                            2τ   t0 −τ                    2sτ       t=t0 −τ
                                             1 −st0 sτ
                                         =      e (e − e−sτ )
                                            2sτ
or
                                                            sinh sτ −st0
                                     L{dτ (t − t0 )} =                e .                             (12)
                                                               sτ
3 Paul A. M. Dirac (1902–1984), English mathematical physicist, received his Ph.D. from Cambridge in 1926
and was professor of mathematics there until 1969. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1933
(with Erwin Schrödinger) for fundamental work in quantum mechanics. His most celebrated result was the
relativistic equation for the electron, published in 1928. From this equation he predicted the existence of
an “anti-electron,” or positron, which was first observed in 1932. Following his retirement from Cambridge,
Dirac moved to the United States and held a research professorship at Florida State University.
        The quotient (sinh sτ)/sτ is indeterminate as τ → 0+ , but its limit can be evaluated
        by L’Hôpital’s4 rule. We obtain
                                               sinh sτ              s cosh sτ
                                         lim              = lim+                  = 1.
                                        τ→0+      sτ         τ→0         s
        Then from Eq. (11) it follows that
                                                  L{δ(t − t0 )} = e−st0 .                                      (13)
        Equation (13) defines L{δ(t − t0 )} for any t0 > 0. We extend this result, to allow t0 to
        be zero, by letting t0 → 0+ on the right side of Eq. (13); thus
                                              L{δ(t)} = lim e−st0 = 1.                                         (14)
                                                            t0 →0+
           In a similar way, it is possible to define the integral of the product of the delta
        function and any continuous function f . We have
                                ∞                                  ∞
                                     δ(t − t0 )f (t) dt = lim+            dτ (t − t0 )f (t) dt.                (15)
                                 −∞                          τ→0     −∞
        Using the definition (4) of dτ (t) and the mean value theorem for integrals, we find
        that
                                  ∞                                  t0 +τ
                                                                 1
                                       dτ (t − t0 )f (t) dt =                f (t) dt
                                  −∞                            2τ t0 −τ
                                                                 1
                                                             =       · 2τ · f (t ∗ ) = f (t ∗ ),
                                                                2τ
        where t0 − τ < t ∗ < t0 + τ. Hence t ∗ → t0 as τ → 0+ , and it follows from Eq. (15) that
                                              ∞
                                                   δ(t − t0 )f (t) dt = f (t0 ).                               (16)
                                              −∞
           The following example illustrates the use of the delta function in solving an initial
        value problem with an impulsive forcing function.
        Find the solution of the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                                2y + y + 2y = δ(t − 5),                                      (17)
   1                                             y(0) = 0,         
                                                                  y (0) = 0.                                    (18)
        This initial value problem arises from the study of the same electric circuit or mechanical
        oscillator as in Example 1 of Section 6.4. The only difference is in the forcing term.
           To solve the given problem, we take the Laplace transform of the differential equation and
        use the initial conditions, obtaining
                                                (2s2 + s + 2)Y(s) = e−5s .
        4 Marquis Guillaume de L’Hôpital (1661–1704) was a French nobleman with deep interest in mathematics.
        For a time he employed Johann Bernoulli as his private tutor in calculus. L’Hôpital published the first
        textbook on differential calculus in 1696; in it appears the differentiation rule that is named for him.
Thus
                                           e−5s         e−5s          1
                            Y(s) =                   =                       .             (19)
                                      2s2 + s + 2         2 s + 1 2 + 15
                                                                    4       16
By Theorem 6.3.2 or from line 9 of Table 6.2.1,
                                                  $                      √
                            −1           1                4 −t/4            15
                          L             2          =  √      e     sin         t.          (20)
                                   s + 41 + 15             15              4
                                                16
Hence, by Theorem 6.3.1, we have
                                                                       √
                             −1               2          −(t−5)/4        15
                       y = L {Y(s)} = √ u5 (t)e                   sin        (t − 5),        (21)
                                              15                         4
which is the formal solution of the given problem. It is also possible to write y in the form
                               ⎧
                               ⎪
                               ⎨0,                                       t < 5,
                                                      √
                          y=        2                   15                                   (22)
                               ⎪
                               ⎩ √ e−(t−5)/4 sin            (t − 5), t ≥ 5.
                                     15                 4
   The graph of Eq. (22) is shown in Figure 6.5.3. Since the initial conditions at t = 0 are
homogeneous and there is no external excitation until t = 5, there is no response in the interval
0 < t < 5. The impulse at t = 5 produces a decaying oscillation that persists indefinitely. The
response is continuous at t = 5 despite the singularity in the forcing function at that point.
However, the first derivative of the solution has a jump discontinuity at t = 5, and the second
derivative has an infinite discontinuity there. This is required by the differential equation (17),
since a singularity on one side of the equation must be balanced by a corresponding singularity
on the other side.
                  y
               0.3
               0.2
               0.1
                                    5                10             15                20 t
              –0.1
               FIGURE 6.5.3 Solution of the initial value problem (17), (18):
                         2y + y + 2y = δ(t − 5), y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0.
   In dealing with problems that involve impulsive forcing, the use of the delta
function usually simplifies the mathematical calculations, often quite significantly.
         However, if the actual excitation extends over a short, but nonzero, time interval,
         then an error will be introduced by modeling the excitation as taking place instan-
         taneously. This error may be negligible, but in a practical problem it should not be
         dismissed without consideration. In Problem 16 you are asked to investigate this
         issue for a simple harmonic oscillator.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 12:
         (a) Find the solution of the given initial value problem.
         (b) Draw a graph of the solution.
           1. y + 2y + 2y = δ(t − π);         y(0) = 1,    y (0) = 0
               
           2. y + 4y = δ(t − π) − δ(t − 2π);           y(0) = 0,     y (0) = 0
           3. y + 3y + 2y = δ(t − 5) + u10 (t);        y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 1/2
                                                          
           4. y − y = −20δ(t − 3);            y(0) = 1, y (0) = 0
           5. y + 2y + 3y = sin t + δ(t − 3π);         y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0
               
           6. y + 4y = δ(t − 4π);           y(0) = 1/2, y (0) = 0
               
           7. y + y = δ(t − 2π) cos t;          y(0) = 0, y (0) = 1
           8. y + 4y = 2δ(t − π/4);         y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0
               
           9. y + y = uπ/2 (t) + 3δ(t − 3π/2) − u2π (t);           y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0
                      
         10. 2y + y + 4y = δ(t − π/6) sin t;           y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0
         11. y + 2y + 2y = cos t + δ(t − π/2);          y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 0
               (4)                                                    
         12. y       − y = δ(t − 1);       y(0) = 0,  y (0) = 0,     y (0) = 0,      y (0) = 0
         13. Consider again the system in Example 1 of this section, in which an oscillation is excited
              by a unit impulse at t = 5. Suppose that it is desired to bring the system to rest again after
              exactly one cycle—that is, when the response first returns to equilibrium moving in the
              positive direction.
              (a) Determine the impulse kδ(t − t0 ) that should be applied to the system in order to
              accomplish this objective. Note that k is the magnitude of the impulse and t0 is the time
              of its application.
              (b) Solve the resulting initial value problem, and plot its solution to confirm that it
              behaves in the specified manner.
         14. Consider the initial value problem
                                      y + γy + y = δ(t − 1),       y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 0,
              where γ is the damping coefficient (or resistance).
              (a) Let γ = 21 . Find the solution of the initial value problem and plot its graph.
              (b) Find the time t1 at which the solution attains its maximum value. Also find the
              maximum value y1 of the solution.
              (c) Let γ = 14 and repeat parts (a) and (b).
              (d) Determine how t1 and y1 vary as γ decreases. What are the values of t1 and y1 when
              γ = 0?
         15. Consider the initial value problem
                                     y + γy + y = kδ(t − 1),         y(0) = 0,     y (0) = 0,
    where k is the magnitude of an impulse at t = 1, and γ is the damping coefficient (or
     resistance).
     (a) Let γ = 21 . Find the value of k for which the response has a peak value of 2; call this
     value k1 .
     (b) Repeat part (a) for γ = 14 .
     (c) Determine how k1 varies as γ decreases. What is the value of k1 when γ = 0?
16. Consider the initial value problem
                                   y + y = fk (t),     y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 0,
     where fk (t) = [u4−k (t) − u4+k (t)]/2k with 0 < k ≤ 1.
     (a) Find the solution y = φ(t, k) of the initial value problem.
     (b) Calculate lim φ(t, k) from the solution found in part (a).
                       k→0+
     (c) Observe that lim fk (t) = δ(t − 4). Find the solution φ0 (t) of the given initial value
                            k→0+
     problem with fk (t) replaced by δ(t − 4). Is it true that φ0 (t) = lim φ(t, k)?
                                                                                k→0+
     (d) Plot φ(t, 1/2), φ(t, 1/4), and φ0 (t) on the same axes. Describe the relation between
     φ(t, k) and φ0 (t).
Problems 17 through 22 deal with the effect of a sequence of impulses on an undamped
oscillator. Suppose that
                                y + y = f (t),      y(0) = 0,     y (0) = 0.
For each of the following choices for f (t):
(a) Try to predict the nature of the solution without solving the problem.
(b) Test your prediction by finding the solution and drawing its graph.
(c) Determine what happens after the sequence of impulses ends.
             20                                                     
                                                                     20
17. f (t) =      δ(t − kπ)                              18. f (t) =      (−1)k+1 δ(t − kπ)
             k=1                                                    k=1
             20                                                     
                                                                     20
19. f (t) =      δ(t − kπ/2)                            20. f (t) =      (−1)k+1 δ(t − kπ/2)
             k=1                                                    k=1
             15                                                     
                                                                     40
21. f (t) =      δ[t − (2k − 1)π]                       22. f (t) =      (−1)k+1 δ(t − 11k/4)
             k=1                                                    k=1
23. The position of a certain lightly damped oscillator satisfies the initial value problem
                                         20
                    y + 0.1y + y =        (−1)k+1 δ(t − kπ),         y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0.
                                         k=1
     Observe that, except for the damping term, this problem is the same as Problem 18.
     (a) Try to predict the nature of the solution without solving the problem.
     (b) Test your prediction by finding the solution and drawing its graph.
     (c) Determine what happens after the sequence of impulses ends.
24. Proceed as in Problem 23 for the oscillator satisfying
                                         15
                     y + 0.1y + y =        δ[t − (2k − 1)π],         y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0.
                                         k=1
    Observe that, except for the damping term, this problem is the same as Problem 21.
               25. (a) By the method of variation of parameters, show that the solution of the initial value
                   problem
                                           y + 2y + 2y = f (t);         y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0
                   is
                                                           t
                                                      y=      e−(t−τ) f (τ) sin(t − τ) dτ.
                                                           0
                   (b) Show that if f (t) = δ(t − π), then the solution of part (a) reduces to
                                                        y = uπ (t)e−(t−π) sin(t − π).
                   (c) Use a Laplace transform to solve the given initial value problem with
                   f (t) = δ(t − π), and confirm that the solution agrees with the result of part (b).
6.6 The Convolution Integral
               Sometimes it is possible to identify a Laplace transform H(s) as the product of two
               other transforms F(s) and G(s), the latter transforms corresponding to known func-
               tions f and g, respectively. In this event, we might anticipate that H(s) would be
               the transform of the product of f and g. However, this is not the case; in other
               words, the Laplace transform cannot be commuted with ordinary multiplication.
               On the other hand, if an appropriately defined “generalized product” is introduced,
               then the situation changes, as stated in the following theorem.
 Theorem 6.6.1 If F(s) = L{ f (t)} and G(s) = L{g(t)} both exist for s > a ≥ 0, then
                                          H(s) = F(s)G(s) = L{h(t)},                  s > a,            (1)
               where                            t                          t
                                      h(t) =       f (t − τ)g(τ) dτ =           f (τ)g(t − τ) dτ.       (2)
                                                0                            0
               The function h is known as the convolution of f and g; the integrals in Eq. (2) are
               called convolution integrals.
                  The equality of the two integrals in Eq. (2) follows by making the change of vari-
               able t − τ = ξ in the first integral. Before giving the proof of this theorem, let us
               make some observations about the convolution integral. According to this theorem,
               the transform of the convolution of two functions, rather than the transform of their
               ordinary product, is given by the product of the separate transforms. It is conven-
               tional to emphasize that the convolution integral can be thought of as a “generalized
               product” by writing
                                                          h(t) = (f ∗ g)(t).                             (3)
In particular, the notation (f ∗ g)(t) serves to indicate the first integral appearing
in Eq. (2).
   The convolution f ∗ g has many of the properties of ordinary multiplication. For
example, it is relatively simple to show that
                           f ∗g =g∗f                          (commutative law)      (4)
                 f ∗ (g1 + g2 ) = f ∗ g1 + f ∗ g2             (distributive law)     (5)
                    ( f ∗ g) ∗ h = f ∗ (g ∗ h)                (associative law)      (6)
                           f ∗ 0 = 0 ∗ f = 0.                                        (7)
In Eq. (7) the zeros denote not the number 0 but the function that has the value 0
for each value of t. The proofs of these properties are left to you as exercises.
   However,there are other properties of ordinary multiplication that the convolution
integral does not have. For example, it is not true in general that f ∗ 1 is equal to f .
To see this, note that
                                     t                          t
                      ( f ∗ 1)(t) =      f (t − τ) · 1 dτ =          f (t − τ) dτ.
                                      0                          0
If, for example, f (t) = cos t, then
                                     t                                       τ=t
                                                                              
                      (f ∗ 1)(t) =       cos(t − τ) dτ = − sin(t − τ)
                                     0                                         τ=0
                                  = − sin 0 + sin t
                                  = sin t.
Clearly, (f ∗ 1)(t)  = f (t) in this case. Similarly, it may not be true that f ∗ f is
nonnegative. See Problem 3 for an example.
   Convolution integrals arise in various applications in which the behavior of the
system at time t depends not only on its state at time t but also on its past history.
Systems of this kind are sometimes called hereditary systems and occur in such diverse
fields as neutron transport, viscoelasticity, and population dynamics, among others.
   Turning now to the proof of Theorem 6.6.1, we note first that if
                                               ∞
                                    F(s) =           e−sξ f (ξ) dξ
                                                0
and                                            ∞
                                   G(s) =            e−sτ g(τ) dτ,
                                               0
then                                   ∞                    ∞
                         F(s)G(s) =          e−sξ f (ξ) dξ       e−sτ g(τ) dτ.       (8)
                                        0                     0
Since the integrand of the first integral does not depend on the integration variable
of the second, we can write F(s)G(s) as an iterated integral
                                     ∞                 ∞                  
                                             −sτ                −sξ
                       F(s)G(s) =          e g(τ)              e f (ξ) dξ dτ
                                      0                   0
                                     ∞           ∞                       
                                                           −s(ξ+τ)
                                  =        g(τ)          e         f (ξ) dξ dτ.      (9)
                                      0              0
        The latter integral can be put into a more convenient form by introducing a change
        of variable. Let ξ = t − τ, for fixed τ, so that dξ = dt. Further, ξ = 0 corresponds to
        t = τ, and ξ = ∞ corresponds to t = ∞; then the integral with respect to ξ in Eq. (9)
        is transformed into one with respect to t:
                                               ∞            ∞                          
                                                                        −st
                               F(s)G(s) =             g(τ)            e f (t − τ) dt dτ.              (10)
                                                 0               τ
        The iterated integral on the right side of Eq. (10) is carried out over the shaded
        wedge-shaped region extending to infinity in the tτ-plane shown in Figure 6.6.1.
        Assuming that the order of integration can be reversed, we rewrite Eq. (10) so that
        the integration with respect to τ is executed first. In this way we obtain
                                                  ∞         t                          
                                F(s)G(s) =             e−st          f (t − τ)g(τ) dτ dt              (11)
                                                   0              0
        or                                            ∞
                                    F(s)G(s) =              e−st h(t) dt = L{h(t)},                   (12)
                                                       0
        where h(t) is defined by Eq. (2). This completes the proof of Theorem 6.6.1.
                                    τ
                                                         τ=t
                                          t =τ                                      t→
                                                           τ=0                             t
                              FIGURE 6.6.1          Region of integration in F(s)G(s).
        Find the inverse transform of
                                                                    a
EXAMPLE                                           H(s) =                    .                         (13)
                                                             s2 (s2 + a2 )
   1
           It is convenient to think of H(s) as the product of s−2 and a/(s2 + a2 ), which, according to
        lines 3 and 5 of Table 6.2.1, are the transforms of t and sin at, respectively. Hence, by Theorem
        6.6.1, the inverse transform of H(s) is
                                              t
                                                                            at − sin at
                                     h(t) =       (t − τ) sin aτ dτ =                   .             (14)
                                               0                                a2
        You can verify that the same result is obtained if h(t) is written in the alternative form
                                                       t
                                             h(t) =        τ sin a(t − τ) dτ,
                                                         0
        which confirms Eq. (2) in this case. Of course, h(t) can also be found by expanding H(s) in
        partial fractions.
        Find the solution of the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                                   y + 4y = g(t),                                  (15)
   2                                         y(0) = 3,       y (0) = −1.                            (16)
           By taking the Laplace transform of the differential equation and using the initial conditions,
        we obtain
                                         s2 Y(s) − 3s + 1 + 4Y(s) = G(s)
        or
                                                       3s − 1       G(s)
                                              Y(s) =           + 2        .                          (17)
                                                       s2 + 4      s +4
        Observe that the first and second terms on the right side of Eq. (17) contain the dependence
        of Y(s) on the initial conditions and forcing function, respectively. It is convenient to write
        Y(s) in the form
                                               s        1 2           1 2
                                  Y(s) = 3 2         −             +           G(s).                 (18)
                                             s + 4 2 s2 + 4 2 s2 + 4
        Then, using lines 5 and 6 of Table 6.2.1 and Theorem 6.6.1, we obtain
                                                               t
                                y = 3 cos 2t − 21 sin 2t + 21      sin 2(t − τ)g(τ) dτ.              (19)
                                                                 0
        If a specific forcing function g is given, then the integral in Eq. (19) can be evaluated (by
        numerical means, if necessary).
           Example 2 illustrates the power of the convolution integral as a tool for writing
        the solution of an initial value problem in terms of an integral. In fact, it is possible
        to proceed in much the same way in more general problems. Consider the problem
        consisting of the differential equation
                                              ay + by + cy = g(t),                               (20)
        where a, b, and c are real constants and g is a given function, together with the initial
        conditions
                                           y(0) = y0 ,        y (0) = y0 .                        (21)
        The transform approach yields some important insights concerning the structure
        of the solution of any problem of this type.
           The initial value problem (20), (21) is often referred to as an input–output problem.
        The coefficients a, b, and c describe the properties of some physical system, and g(t)
        is the input to the system. The values y0 and y0 describe the initial state, and the
        solution y is the output at time t.
           By taking the Laplace transform of Eq. (20) and using the initial conditions (21),
        we obtain
                              (as2 + bs + c)Y(s) − (as + b)y0 − ay0 = G(s).
        If we let
                                     (as + b)y0 + ay0                          G(s)
                           (s) =                         ,        (s) =                ,          (22)
                                       as2 + bs + c                         as2 + bs + c
        then we can write
                                               Y(s) = (s) + (s).                                  (23)
        Consequently,
                                                 y = φ(t) + ψ(t),                                   (24)
         where φ(t) = L−1 {(s)} and ψ(t) = L−1 {(s)}. Observe that φ(t) is the solution of
         the initial value problem
                                ay + by + cy = 0,           y(0) = y0 ,       y (0) = y0 ,                (25)
         obtained from Eqs. (20) and (21) by setting g(t) equal to zero. Similarly, ψ(t) is the
         solution of
                               ay + by + cy = g(t),            y(0) = 0, y (0) = 0,                        (26)
         in which the initial values y0 and y0 are each replaced by zero.
            Once specific values of a, b, and c are given, we can find φ(t) = L−1 {(s)} by using
         Table 6.2.1, possibly in conjunction with a translation or a partial fraction expansion.
         To find ψ(t) = L−1 {(s)}, it is convenient to write (s) as
                                                   (s) = H(s)G(s),                                            (27)
         where H(s) = (as2 + bs + c)−1 . The function H is known as the transfer function5
         and depends only on the properties of the system under consideration; that is, H(s) is
         determined entirely by the coefficients a, b, and c. On the other hand, G(s) depends
         only on the external excitation g(t) that is applied to the system. By the convolution
         theorem we can write
                                                                    t
                                  ψ(t) = L−1 {H(s)G(s)} =               h(t − τ)g(τ) dτ,                       (28)
                                                                     0
                           −1
         where h(t) = L {H(s)}, and g(t) is the given forcing function.
            To obtain a better understanding of the significance of h(t), we consider the case in
         which G(s) = 1; consequently, g(t) = δ(t) and (s) = H(s). This means that y = h(t)
         is the solution of the initial value problem
                               ay + by + cy = δ(t),            y(0) = 0,       y (0) = 0,                  (29)
         obtained from Eq. (26) by replacing g(t) by δ(t). Thus h(t) is the response of the
         system to a unit impulse applied at t = 0, and it is natural to call h(t) the impulse
         response of the system. Equation (28) then says that ψ(t) is the convolution of the
         impulse response and the forcing function.
            Referring to Example 2, we note that in that case, the transfer function is
         H(s) = 1/(s2 + 4) and the impulse response is h(t) = (sin 2t)/2. Also, the first two
         terms on the right side of Eq. (19) constitute the function φ(t), the solution of the
         corresponding homogeneous equation that satisfies the given initial conditions.
PROBLEMS   1. Establish the commutative, distributive, and associative properties of the convolution
              integral.
              (a) f ∗ g = g ∗ f
              (b) f ∗ (g1 + g2 ) = f ∗ g1 + f ∗ g2
              (c) f ∗ (g ∗ h) = (f ∗ g) ∗ h
         5This terminology arises from the fact that H(s) is the ratio of the transforms of the output and the input
         of the problem (26).
 2. Find an example different from the one in the text showing that (f ∗ 1)(t) need not be
    equal to f (t).
 3. Show, by means of the example f (t) = sin t, that f ∗ f is not necessarily nonnegative.
In each of Problems 4 through 7, find the Laplace transform of the given function.
                t                                                                t
 4. f (t) =          (t − τ)2 cos 2τ dτ                           5. f (t) =         e−(t−τ) sin τ dτ
                 0                                                                0
                t                                                                t
 6. f (t) =          (t − τ)eτ dτ                                 7. f (t) =         sin(t − τ) cos τ dτ
                 0                                                                0
In each of Problems 8 through 11, find the inverse Laplace transform of the given function by
using the convolution theorem.
                        1                                                                   s
 8. F(s) = 4 2                                                    9. F(s) =
                s (s + 1)                                                         (s + 1)(s2 + 4)
                           1                                                       G(s)
10. F(s) =                                                      11. F(s) =
                (s + 1)2 (s2 + 4)                                                 s2 + 1
12. (a) If f (t) = t m and g(t) = t n , where m and n are positive integers, show that
                                                                  1
                                          f ∗ g = t m+n+1               um (1 − u)n du.
                                                                   0
    (b) Use the convolution theorem to show that
                                          1
                                                                              m! n!
                                              um (1 − u)n du =                              .
                                           0                             (m + n + 1)!
    (c) Extend the result of part (b) to the case where m and n are positive numbers but not
    necessarily integers.
In each of Problems 13 through 20, express the solution of the given initial value problem in
terms of a convolution integral.
13. y + ω2 y = g(t);            y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 1
14. y + 2y + 2y = sin αt;             y(0) = 0,         y (0) = 0
                
15. 4y + 4y + 17y = g(t);                 y(0) = 0,         y (0) = 0
16. y + y + 45 y = 1 − uπ (t);            y(0) = 1,         y (0) = −1
                                                      
17. y + 4y + 4y = g(t);                y(0) = 2,       y (0) = −3
18. y + 3y + 2y = cos αt;             y(0) = 1,         y (0) = 0
19. y(4) − y = g(t);            y(0) = 0,      y (0) = 0,         y (0) = 0,      y (0) = 0
      (4)                                                                  
20. y       + 5y + 4y = g(t);           y(0) = 1,         y (0) = 0,         y (0) = 0,        y (0) = 0
21. Consider the equation
                                                      t
                                          φ(t) +         k(t − ξ)φ(ξ) dξ = f (t),
                                                      0
    in which f and k are known functions, and φ is to be determined. Since the unknown
    function φ appears under an integral sign, the given equation is called an integral equation;
    in particular,it belongs to a class of integral equations known asVolterra integral equations.
    Take the Laplace transform of the given integral equation and obtain an expression for
    L{φ(t)} in terms of the transforms L{ f (t)} and L{k(t)} of the given functions f and k. The
    inverse transform of L{φ(t)} is the solution of the original integral equation.
22. Consider the Volterra integral equation (see Problem 21)
                                                 t
                                       φ(t) + (t − ξ)φ(ξ) dξ = sin 2t.                        (i)
                                                  0
     (a) Solve the integral equation (i) by using the Laplace transform.
     (b) By differentiating Eq. (i) twice, show that φ(t) satisfies the differential equation
                                            φ (t) + φ(t) = −4 sin 2t.
     Show also that the initial conditions are
                                            φ(0) = 0,        φ (0) = 2.
     (c) Solve the initial value problem in part (b), and verify that the solution is the same as
     the one in part (a).
In each of Problems 23 through 25:
(a) Solve the given Volterra integral equation by using the Laplace transform.
(b) Convert the integral equation into an initial value problem, as in Problem 22(b).
(c) Solve the initial value problem in part (b), and verify that the solution is the same as the
one in part (a).
              t                                                      t
23. φ(t) + (t − ξ)φ(ξ) dξ = 1                            24. φ(t) − (t − ξ)φ(ξ) dξ = 1
                t
               0                                                      0
                                            −t
25. φ(t) + 2         cos(t − ξ)φ(ξ) dξ = e
                  0
There are also equations, known as integro-differential equations, in which both derivatives
and integrals of the unknown function appear. In each of Problems 26 through 28:
(a) Solve the given integro-differential equation by using the Laplace transform.
(b) By differentiating the integro-differential equation a sufficient number of times, convert
it into an initial value problem.
(c) Solve the initial value problem in part (b), and verify that the solution is the same as the
one in part (a).
              t
26. φ (t) + (t − ξ)φ(ξ) dξ = t,             φ(0) = 0
                0
                  t
27. φ (t) − 21      (t − ξ)2 φ(ξ) dξ = −t,         φ(0) = 1
                   0
                         t
28. φ (t) + φ(t) =         sin(t − ξ)φ(ξ) dξ,        φ(0) = 1
                         0
29. The Tautochrone. A problem of interest in the history of mathematics is that of finding
     the tautochrone6 —the curve down which a particle will slide freely under gravity alone,
     reaching the bottom in the same time regardless of its starting point on the curve. This
     problem arose in the construction of a clock pendulum whose period is independent of
     the amplitude of its motion. The tautochrone was found by Christian Huygens (1629–
     1695) in 1673 by geometrical methods, and later by Leibniz and Jakob Bernoulli using
     analytical arguments. Bernoulli’s solution (in 1690) was one of the first occasions on which
6The word “tautochrone” comes from the Greek words tauto, which means “same,” and chronos, which
means “time.”
a differential equation was explicitly solved. The geometric configuration is shown in
Figure 6.6.2. The starting point P(a, b) is joined to the terminal point (0, 0) by the arc C.
Arc length s is measured from the origin, and f (y) denotes the rate of change of s with
respect to y:
                                                            1/2
                                         ds             dx 2
                                f (y) =      = 1+                 .                        (i)
                                        dy              dy
Then it follows from the principle of conservation of energy that the time T(b) required
for a particle to slide from P to the origin is
                                                 b
                                             1         f (y)
                                  T(b) =                    dy.                         (ii)
                                             2g 0      b−y
                            y
                                                          P(a, b)
                                                     C
                                   s
                                                                  x
                            FIGURE 6.6.2 The tautochrone.
(a) Assume that T(b) = T0 , a constant, for each b. By taking the Laplace transform of
Eq. (ii) in this case, and using the convolution theorem, show that
                                                
                                                  2g T0
                                        F(s) =         √ ;                               (iii)
                                                   π s
then show that
                                                
                                                  2g T0
                                        f (y) =       √ .                                (iv)
                                                 π       y
Hint: See Problem 31 of Section 6.1.
(b) Combining Eqs. (i) and (iv), show that
                                         dx      2α − y
                                             =             ,                              (v)
                                         dy          y
where α = gT02 /π2 .
(c) Use the substitution y = 2α sin2 (θ/2) to solve Eq. (v), and show that
                            x = α(θ + sin θ),       y = α(1 − cos θ).                    (vi)
Equations (vi) can be identified as parametric equations of a cycloid. Thus the tautochrone
is an arc of a cycloid.
REFERENCES The books listed below contain additional information on the Laplace transform and its applications.
           Churchill, R. V., Operational Mathematics (3rd ed.) (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971).
           Doetsch, G., Introduction to the Theory and Application of the Laplace Transform (trans. W. Nader) (New
             York: Springer, 1974).
           Kaplan, W., Operational Methods for Linear Systems (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1962).
           Kuhfittig, P. K. F., Introduction to the Laplace Transform (New York: Plenum, 1978).
           Miles, J. W., Integral Transforms in Applied Mathematics (London: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
           Rainville, E. D., The Laplace Transform: An Introduction (New York: Macmillan, 1963).
              Each of the books just mentioned contains a table of transforms. Extensive tables are also available.
           See, for example,
           Erdelyi, A. (ed.), Tables of Integral Transforms (Vol. 1) (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1954).
           Roberts, G. E., and Kaufman, H., Table of Laplace Transforms (Philadelphia: Saunders, 1966).
              A further discussion of generalized functions can be found in
           Lighthill, M. J., An Introduction to Fourier Analysis and Generalized Functions (London: Cambridge
              University Press, 1958).
 CHAPTER
      7
               Systems of First
               Order Linear
               Equations
               There are many physical problems that involve a number of separate elements
               linked together in some manner. For example, electrical networks have this char-
               acter, as do many problems in mechanics and in other fields. In these and similar
               cases, the corresponding mathematical problem consists of a system of two or
               more differential equations, which can always be written as first order equations.
               In this chapter we focus on systems of first order linear equations, and in par-
               ticular equations having constant coefficients, utilizing some of the elementary
               aspects of linear algebra to unify the presentation. In many respects this chap-
               ter follows the same lines as the treatment of second order linear equations in
               Chapter 3.
7.1 Introduction
               Systems of simultaneous ordinary differential equations arise naturally in problems
               involving several dependent variables, each of which is a function of the same single
               independent variable. We will denote the independent variable by t and will let
               x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . represent dependent variables that are functions of t. Differentiation
               with respect to t will be denoted by a prime.
                  For example, consider the spring–mass system in Figure 7.1.1. The two masses
               move on a frictionless surface under the influence of external forces F1 (t) and F2 (t),
               and they are also constrained by the three springs whose constants are k1 , k2 , and k3 ,
                                                                                                      359
respectively. Using arguments similar to those in Section 3.7, we find the following
equations for the coordinates x1 and x2 of the two masses:
                          d2 x1
                       m1       = k2 (x2 − x1 ) − k1 x1 + F1 (t)
                           dt 2
                                = −(k1 + k2 )x1 + k2 x2 + F1 (t),
                                                                                   (1)
                          d2 x2
                       m2       = −k3 x2 − k2 (x2 − x1 ) + F2 (t)
                           dt 2
                                = k2 x1 − (k2 + k3 )x2 + F2 (t).
A derivation of Eqs. (1) is outlined in Problem 17.
                                F1(t)                   F2(t)
                    k1                   k2                      k3
                              m1                      m2
                                 x1                      x2
                   FIGURE 7.1.1 A two-mass, three-spring system.
  Next, consider the parallel LRC circuit shown in Figure 7.1.2. Let V be the voltage
drop across the capacitor and I the current through the inductor. Then, referring
to Section 3.7 and to Problem 19 of this section, we can show that the voltage and
current are described by the system of equations
                                     dI   V
                                        = ,
                                     dt   L
                                                                                   (2)
                                    dV      I      V
                                        =− −          ,
                                    dt      C     RC
where L is the inductance, C is the capacitance, and R is the resistance.
                                           C
                                           R
                                           L
                        FIGURE 7.1.2 A parallel LRC circuit.
  One reason why systems of first order equations are particularly important is that
equations of higher order can always be transformed into such systems. This is usually
required if a numerical approach is planned, because almost all codes for generat-
ing numerical approximations to solutions of differential equations are written for
        systems of first order equations. The following example illustrates how easy it is to
        make the transformation.
        The motion of a certain spring–mass system (see Example 3 of Section 3.7) is described by the
EXAMPLE second order differential equation
   1                                              u + 0.125u + u = 0.                                   (3)
        Rewrite this equation as a system of first order equations.
           Let x1 = u and x2 = u . Then it follows that x1 = x2 . Further, u = x2 . Then, by substituting
        for u, u , and u in Eq. (3), we obtain
                                                  x2 + 0.125x2 + x1 = 0.
        Thus x1 and x2 satisfy the following system of two first order differential equations:
                                                   x1 = x2 ,
                                                                                                           (4)
                                                   x2 = −x1 − 0.125x2 .
           The general equation of motion of a spring–mass system
                                               mu + γu + ku = F(t)                                      (5)
        can be transformed into a system of first order equations in the same manner. If we
        let x1 = u and x2 = u , and proceed as in Example 1, we quickly obtain the system
                                       x1 = x2 ,
                                                                                                           (6)
                                       x2 = −(k/m)x1 − (γ/m)x2 + F(t)/m.
           To transform an arbitrary nth order equation
                                             y(n) = F(t, y, y , . . . , y(n−1) )                          (7)
        into a system of n first order equations, we extend the method of Example 1 by
        introducing the variables x1 , x2 , . . . , xn defined by
                                x1 = y,     x2 = y ,    x3 = y ,      ...,     xn = y(n−1) .            (8)
        It then follows immediately that
                                                            x1 = x2 ,
                                                            x2 = x3 ,
                                                                                                           (9)
                                                                ..
                                                                 .
                                                          
                                                        xn−1 = xn ,
        and, from Eq. (7),
                                               xn = F(t, x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ).                        (10)
                 Equations (9) and (10) are a special case of the more general system
                                                              x1 = F1 (t, x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ),
                                                              x2 = F2 (t, x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ),
                                                                                                                  (11)
                                                                  ..
                                                                   .
                                                              xn = Fn (t, x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ).
              In a similar way, the system (1) can be reduced to a system of four first order equations
              of the form (11), and the system (2) is already in this form. In fact, systems of the
              form (11) include almost all cases of interest, so much of the more advanced theory
              of differential equations is devoted to such systems.
                 A solution of the system (11) on the interval I: α < t < β is a set of n functions
                                                 x1 = φ1 (t),       x2 = φ2 (t),       ...,      xn = φn (t)      (12)
              that are differentiable at all points in the interval I and that satisfy the system of equa-
              tions (11) at all points in this interval. In addition to the given system of differential
              equations, there may also be given initial conditions of the form
                                               x1 (t0 ) = x10 ,   x2 (t0 ) = x20 ,     ...,      xn (t0 ) = xn0 , (13)
              where t0 is a specified value of t in I, and x10 , . . . , xn0 are prescribed numbers. The
              differential equations (11) and the initial conditions (13) together form an initial
              value problem.
                 A solution (12) can be viewed as a set of parametric equations in an n-dimensional
              space. For a given value of t, Eqs. (12) give values for the coordinates x1 , . . . , xn of a
              point in the space. As t changes, the coordinates in general also change. The collection
              of points corresponding to α < t < β forms a curve in the space. It is often helpful to
              think of the curve as the trajectory, or path, of a particle moving in accordance with
              the system of differential equations (11). The initial conditions (13) determine the
              starting point of the moving particle.
                 The following conditions on F1 , F2 , . . . , Fn , which are easily checked in specific
              problems, are sufficient to ensure that the initial value problem (11), (13) has a unique
              solution. Theorem 7.1.1 is analogous to Theorem 2.4.2, the existence and uniqueness
              theorem for a single first order equation.
Theorem 7.1.1 Let each of the functions F1 , . . . , Fn and the partial derivatives ∂F1 /∂x1 , . . . ,
              ∂F1 /∂xn , . . . , ∂Fn /∂x1 , . . . , ∂Fn /∂xn be continuous in a region R of tx1 x2 · · · xn -
              space defined by α < t < β, α1 < x1 < β1 , . . . , αn < xn < βn , and let the point
              (t0 , x10 , x20 , . . . , xn0 ) be in R. Then there is an interval |t − t0 | < h in which there exists
              a unique solution x1 = φ1 (t), . . . , xn = φn (t) of the system of differential equations
              (11) that also satisfies the initial conditions (13).
                 The proof of this theorem can be constructed by generalizing the argument in
              Section 2.8, but we do not give it here. However, note that, in the hypotheses of the
              theorem, nothing is said about the partial derivatives of F1 , . . . , Fn with respect to
              the independent variable t. Also, in the conclusion, the length 2h of the interval in
              which the solution exists is not specified exactly, and in some cases it may be very
              short. Finally, the same result can be established on the basis of somewhat weaker but
              more complicated hypotheses, so the theorem as stated is not the most general one
              known, and the given conditions are sufficient, but not necessary, for the conclusion
              to hold.
                 If each of the functions F1 , . . . , Fn in Eqs. (11) is a linear function of the dependent
              variables x1 , . . . , xn , then the system of equations is said to be linear; otherwise, it is
              nonlinear. Thus the most general system of n first order linear equations has the form
                                              x1 = p11 (t)x1 + · · · + p1n (t)xn + g1 (t),
                                              x2 = p21 (t)x1 + · · · + p2n (t)xn + g2 (t),
                                                                                                        (14)
                                                  ..
                                                   .
                                              xn = pn1 (t)x1 + · · · + pnn (t)xn + gn (t).
              If each of the functions g1 (t), . . . , gn (t) is zero for all t in the interval I, then the
              system (14) is said to be homogeneous; otherwise, it is nonhomogeneous. Observe
              that the systems (1) and (2) are both linear. The system (1) is nonhomogeneous unless
              F1 (t) = F2 (t) = 0, while the system (2) is homogeneous. For the linear system (14),
              the existence and uniqueness theorem is simpler and also has a stronger conclusion.
              It is analogous to Theorems 2.4.1 and 3.2.1.
Theorem 7.1.2 If the functions p11 , p12 , . . . , pnn , g1 , . . . , gn are continuous on an open interval
              I: α < t < β, then there exists a unique solution x1 = φ1 (t), . . . , xn = φn (t) of the
              system (14) that also satisfies the initial conditions (13), where t0 is any point in I,
              and x10 , . . . , xn0 are any prescribed numbers. Moreover, the solution exists throughout
              the interval I.
                 Note that, in contrast to the situation for a nonlinear system, the existence and
              uniqueness of the solution of a linear system are guaranteed throughout the interval
              in which the hypotheses are satisfied. Furthermore, for a linear system the initial
              values x10 , . . . , xn0 at t = t0 are completely arbitrary, whereas in the nonlinear case the
              initial point must lie in the region R defined in Theorem 7.1.1.
                 The rest of this chapter is devoted to systems of linear first order equations (non-
              linear systems are included in the discussion in Chapters 8 and 9). Our presentation
              makes use of matrix notation and assumes that you have some familiarity with the
              properties of matrices. The basic facts about matrices are summarized in Sections 7.2
              and 7.3, and some more advanced material is reviewed as needed in later sections.
PROBLEMS      In each of Problems 1 through 4, transform the given equation into a system of first order
              equations.
                1. u + 0.5u + 2u = 0                                2. u + 0.5u + 2u = 3 sin t
                    2         
                3. t u + tu + (t − 0.25)u = 0
                                      2
                                                                       4. u(4) − u = 0
In each of Problems 5 and 6, transform the given initial value problem into an initial value
problem for two first order equations.
 5. u + 0.25u + 4u = 2 cos 3t,         u(0) = 1, u (0) = −2
              
 6. u + p(t)u + q(t)u = g(t),            u(0) = u0 , u (0) = u0
 7. Systems of first order equations can sometimes be transformed into a single equation of
    higher order. Consider the system
                                    x1 = −2x1 + x2 ,         x2 = x1 − 2x2 .
    (a) Solve the first equation for x2 and substitute into the second equation, thereby obtain-
    ing a second order equation for x1 . Solve this equation for x1 and then determine x2
    also.
    (b) Find the solution of the given system that also satisfies the initial conditions x1 (0) = 2,
    x2 (0) = 3.
    (c) Sketch the curve, for t ≥ 0, given parametrically by the expressions for x1 and x2
    obtained in part (b).
In each of Problems 8 through 12, proceed as in Problem 7.
(a) Transform the given system into a single equation of second order.
(b) Find x1 and x2 that also satisfy the given initial conditions.
(c) Sketch the graph of the solution in the x1 x2 -plane for t ≥ 0.
 8. x1 = 3x1 − 2x2 ,      x1 (0) = 3                   9. x1 = 1.25x1 + 0.75x2 ,        x1 (0) = −2
    x2 = 2x1 − 2x2 ,      x2 (0) = 21                     x2 = 0.75x1 + 1.25x2 ,        x2 (0) = 1
10. x1 = x1 − 2x2 ,      x1 (0) = −1                 11.  x1 = 2x2 ,       x1 (0) = 3
    x2 = 3x1 − 4x2 ,      x2 (0) = 2                      x2 = −2x1 ,        x2 (0) = 4
12. x1 = −0.5x1 + 2x2 ,        x1 (0) = −2
    x2 = −2x1 − 0.5x2 ,        x2 (0) = 2
13. Transform Eqs. (2) for the parallel circuit into a single second order equation.
14. Show that if a11 , a12 , a21 , and a22 are constants with a12 and a21 not both zero, and if the
    functions g1 and g2 are differentiable, then the initial value problem
                                x1 = a11 x1 + a12 x2 + g1 (t),       x1 (0) = x10
                                x2 = a21 x1 + a22 x2 + g2 (t),       x2 (0) = x20
    can be transformed into an initial value problem for a single second order equation. Can
    the same procedure be carried out if a11 , . . . , a22 are functions of t?
15. Consider the linear homogeneous system
                                            x = p11 (t)x + p12 (t)y,
                                            y = p21 (t)x + p22 (t)y.
    Show that if x = x1 (t), y = y1 (t) and x = x2 (t), y = y2 (t) are two solutions of the given
    system, then x = c1 x1 (t) + c2 x2 (t), y = c1 y1 (t) + c2 y2 (t) is also a solution for any constants
    c1 and c2 . This is the principle of superposition.
16. Let x = x1 (t), y = y1 (t) and x = x2 (t), y = y2 (t) be any two solutions of the linear
     nonhomogeneous system
                                        x = p11 (t)x + p12 (t)y + g1 (t),
                                        y = p21 (t)x + p22 (t)y + g2 (t).
     Show that x = x1 (t) − x2 (t), y = y1 (t) − y2 (t) is a solution of the corresponding homoge-
     neous system.
17. Equations (1) can be derived by drawing a free-body diagram showing the forces acting
     on each mass. Figure 7.1.3a shows the situation when the displacements x1 and x2 of the
     two masses are both positive (to the right) and x2 > x1 . Then springs 1 and 2 are elongated
     and spring 3 is compressed, giving rise to forces as shown in Figure 7.1.3b. Use Newton’s
     law (F = ma) to derive Eqs. (1).
                               k1                        k2                  k3
                                          m1                            m2
                                        x1                          x2
                                                     (a)
                       k1x1             F1(t)            k2(x2 – x1)         F2(t)
                                 m1                                       m2
                                       k2(x2 – x1)                             k 3 x2
                                                     (b)
                FIGURE 7.1.3 (a) The displacements x1 and x2 are both positive.
                      (b) The free-body diagram for the spring–mass system.
18. Transform the system (1) into a system of first order equations by letting y1 = x1 , y2 = x2 ,
     y3 = x1 , and y4 = x2 .
Electric Circuits. The theory of electric circuits, such as that shown in Figure 7.1.2, consisting
of inductors, resistors, and capacitors, is based on Kirchhoff’s laws: (1) The net flow of current
into each node (or junction) is zero, and (2) the net voltage drop around each closed loop
is zero. In addition to Kirchhoff’s laws, we also have the relation between the current I in
amperes through each circuit element and the voltage drop V in volts across the element:
                                   V = RI,      R = resistance in ohms;
                                dV
                              C      = I,       C = capacitance in farads1 ;
                                 dt
                                 dI
                               L     = V,       L = inductance in henrys.
                                  dt
Kirchhoff’s laws and the current–voltage relation for each circuit element provide a system of
algebraic and differential equations from which the voltage and current throughout the circuit
can be determined. Problems 19 through 21 illustrate the procedure just described.
1Actual capacitors typically have capacitances measured in microfarads. We use farad as the unit for
numerical convenience.
19. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 7.1.2. Let I1 , I2 , and I3 be the currents through the
    capacitor, resistor, and inductor, respectively. Likewise, let V1 , V2 , and V3 be the corre-
    sponding voltage drops. The arrows denote the arbitrarily chosen directions in which
    currents and voltage drops will be taken to be positive.
    (a) Applying Kirchhoff’s second law to the upper loop in the circuit, show that
                                               V1 − V2 = 0.                                    (i)
    In a similar way, show that
                                               V2 − V3 = 0.                                   (ii)
    (b) Applying Kirchhoff’s first law to either node in the circuit, show that
                                             I1 + I2 + I3 = 0.                               (iii)
    (c) Use the current–voltage relation through each element in the circuit to obtain the
    equations
                                 CV1 = I1 ,    V2 = RI2 ,       LI3 = V3 .                 (iv)
    (d) Eliminate V2 , V3 , I1 , and I2 among Eqs. (i) through (iv) to obtain
                                                   V1
                                    CV1 = −I3 −      ,      LI3 = V1 .                      (v)
                                                    R
    Observe that if we omit the subscripts in Eqs. (v), then we have the system (2) of this
    section.
20. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 7.1.4. Use the method outlined in Problem 19 to show
    that the current I through the inductor and the voltage V across the capacitor satisfy the
    system of differential equations
                                   dI                    dV
                                       = −I − V,              = 2I − V.
                                   dt                     dt
                                                R = 1 ohm
                                                             L = 1 henry
                              R = 2 ohms
                                                  C = 12 farad
                          FIGURE 7.1.4 The circuit in Problem 20.
21. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 7.1.5. Use the method outlined in Problem 19 to show
    that the current I through the inductor and the voltage V across the capacitor satisfy the
    system of differential equations
                                 dI                       dV          V
                               L     = −R1 I − V,       C      =I−       .
                                 dt                        dt         R2
                                                 L
                                       R1    R2
                                                      C
                           FIGURE 7.1.5 The circuit in Problem 21.
22. Consider the two interconnected tanks shown in Figure 7.1.6. Tank 1 initially contains
    30 gal of water and 25 oz of salt, and Tank 2 initially contains 20 gal of water and 15 oz
    of salt. Water containing 1 oz/gal of salt flows into Tank 1 at a rate of 1.5 gal/min. The
    mixture flows from Tank 1 to Tank 2 at a rate of 3 gal/min. Water containing 3 oz/gal of salt
    also flows into Tank 2 at a rate of 1 gal/min (from the outside). The mixture drains from
    Tank 2 at a rate of 4 gal/min, of which some flows back into Tank 1 at a rate of 1.5 gal/min,
    while the remainder leaves the system.
    (a) Let Q1 (t) and Q2 (t), respectively, be the amount of salt in each tank at time t. Write
    down differential equations and initial conditions that model the flow process. Observe
    that the system of differential equations is nonhomogeneous.
    (b) Find the values of Q1 and Q2 for which the system is in equilibrium—that is, does not
    change with time. Let QE1 and QE2 be the equilibrium values. Can you predict which tank
    will approach its equilibrium state more rapidly?
    (c) Let x1 = Q1 (t) − QE1 and x2 = Q2 (t) − QE2 . Determine an initial value problem for x1
    and x2 . Observe that the system of equations for x1 and x2 is homogeneous.
        1.5 gal/min                                                              1 gal/min
         1 oz/gal                                                                 3 oz/gal
                                               3 gal/min
                         Q1(t) oz salt                             Q2(t) oz salt
                         30 gal water                              20 gal water
                                          1.5 gal/min
                            Tank 1                                   Tank 2
                                                         2.5 gal/min
                    FIGURE 7.1.6 Two interconnected tanks (Problem 22).
               23. Consider two interconnected tanks similar to those in Figure 7.1.6. Initially,Tank 1 contains
                   60 gal of water and Q01 oz of salt, and Tank 2 contains 100 gal of water and Q02 oz of salt.
                   Water containing q1 oz/gal of salt flows into Tank 1 at a rate of 3 gal/min. The mixture
                   in Tank 1 flows out at a rate of 4 gal/min, of which half flows into Tank 2, while the
                   remainder leaves the system. Water containing q2 oz/gal of salt also flows into Tank 2 from
                   the outside at the rate of 1 gal/min. The mixture in Tank 2 leaves it at a rate of 3 gal/min, of
                   which some flows back into Tank 1 at a rate of 1 gal/min, while the rest leaves the system.
                   (a) Draw a diagram that depicts the flow process described above. Let Q1 (t) and Q2 (t),
                   respectively, be the amount of salt in each tank at time t. Write down differential equations
                   and initial conditions for Q1 and Q2 that model the flow process.
                   (b) Find the equilibrium values QE1 and QE2 in terms of the concentrations q1 and q2 .
                   (c) Is it possible (by adjusting q1 and q2 ) to obtain QE1 = 60 and QE2 = 50 as an equilibrium
                   state?
                   (d) Describe which equilibrium states are possible for this system for various values of q1
                   and q2 .
7.2 Review of Matrices
               For both theoretical and computational reasons, it is advisable to bring some of the
               results of matrix algebra2 to bear on the initial value problem for a system of linear
               differential equations. For reference purposes, this section and the next are devoted
               to a brief summary of the facts that will be needed later. More details can be found
               in any elementary book on linear algebra. We assume, however, that you are familiar
               with determinants and how to evaluate them.
                  We designate matrices by boldfaced capitals A, B, C, . . . , occasionally using bold-
               faced Greek capitals , , . . . . A matrix A consists of a rectangular array of numbers,
               or elements, arranged in m rows and n columns—that is,
                                                     ⎛                            ⎞
                                                        a11    a12    ···     a1n
                                                     ⎜ a21     a22    ···     a2n ⎟
                                                     ⎜                            ⎟
                                               A=⎜ .             ..            .. ⎟  .                             (1)
                                                     ⎝ ..         .             . ⎠
                                                        am1    am2    ···    amn
               We speak of A as an m × n matrix. Although later in the chapter we will often assume
               that the elements of certain matrices are real numbers, in this section we assume that
               2The properties of matrices were first extensively explored in 1858 in a paper by the English algebraist
               Arthur Cayley (1821–1895), although the word “matrix” was introduced by his good friend James Sylvester
               (1814–1897) in 1850. Cayley did some of his best mathematical work while practicing law from 1849 to
               1863; he then became professor of mathematics at Cambridge, a position he held for the rest of his life.
               After Cayley’s groundbreaking work, the development of matrix theory proceeded rapidly, with significant
               contributions by Charles Hermite, Georg Frobenius, and Camille Jordan, among others.
the elements of matrices may be complex numbers. The element lying in the ith row
and jth column is designated by aij , the first subscript identifying its row and the
second its column. Sometimes the notation (aij ) is used to denote the matrix whose
generic element is aij .
    Associated with each matrix A is the matrix AT , which is known as the transpose
of A and is obtained from A by interchanging the rows and columns of A. Thus, if
A = (aij ), then AT = (aji ). Also, we will denote by aij the complex conjugate of aij ,
and by A the matrix obtained from A by replacing each element aij by its conjugate
aij . The matrix A is called the conjugate of A. It will also be necessary to consider
                                                T
the transpose of the conjugate matrix A . This matrix is called the adjoint of A and
will be denoted by A∗ .
    For example, let
                                                              
                                             3          2−i
                                   A=                            .
                                          4 + 3i    −5 + 2i
    Then
                                                                             
                              3      4 + 3i                     3        2+i
                     A =
                      T
                                              ,      A=                           ,
                            2−i    −5 + 2i                   4 − 3i     −5 − 2i
                                                              
                                     ∗
                                              3         4 − 3i
                                   A =                           .
                                           2+i      −5 − 2i
    We are particularly interested in two somewhat special kinds of matrices: square
matrices, which have the same number of rows and columns—that is, m = n; and
vectors (or column vectors), which can be thought of as n × 1 matrices, or matri-
ces having only one column. Square matrices having n rows and n columns are
said to be of order n. We denote (column) vectors by boldfaced lowercase letters:
x, y, ξ, η, . . . . The transpose xT of an n × 1 column vector is a 1 × n row vector—that
is, the matrix consisting of one row whose elements are the same as the elements in
the corresponding positions of x.
Properties of Matrices.
    1. Equality. Two m × n matrices A and B are said to be equal if all corresponding
elements are equal—that is, if aij = bij for each i and j.
    2. Zero. The symbol 0 will be used to denote the matrix (or vector) each of whose
elements is zero.
    3. Addition. The sum of two m × n matrices A and B is defined as the matrix
obtained by adding corresponding elements:
                                A + B = (aij ) + (bij ) = (aij + bij ).               (2)
With this definition, it follows that matrix addition is commutative and associative,
so that
                  A + B = B + A,        A + (B + C) = (A + B) + C.                  (3)
   4. Multiplication by a Number. The product of a matrix A by a real or complex
number α is defined as follows:
                                 αA = α(aij ) = (αaij );                            (4)
that is, each element of A is multiplied by α. The distributive laws
                   α(A + B) = αA + αB,           (α + β)A = αA + βA                 (5)
are satisfied for this type of multiplication. In particular, the negative of A, denoted
by −A, is defined by
                                    −A = (−1)A.                                     (6)
   5. Subtraction. The difference A − B of two m × n matrices is defined by
                                 A − B = A + (−B).                                  (7)
Thus
                           A − B = (aij ) − (bij ) = (aij − bij ),                  (8)
which is similar to Eq. (2).
   6. Multiplication. The product AB of two matrices is defined whenever the num-
ber of columns in the first factor is the same as the number of rows in the second.
If A and B are m × n and n × r matrices, respectively, then the product C = AB is an
m × r matrix. The element in the ith row and jth column of C is found by multiplying
each element of the ith row of A by the corresponding element of the jth column of
B and then adding the resulting products. In symbols,
                                           n
                                    cij =     aik bkj .                             (9)
                                          k=1
By direct calculation, it can be shown that matrix multiplication satisfies the
associative law
                                   (AB)C = A(BC)                                   (10)
and the distributive law
                               A(B + C) = AB + AC.                                 (11)
However, in general, matrix multiplication is not commutative. For both products
AB and BA to exist and to be of the same size, it is necessary that A and B be square
matrices of the same order. Even in that case the two products are usually unequal,
so that, in general,
                                       AB  = BA.                                  (12)
        To illustrate the multiplication of matrices, and also the fact that matrix multiplication is not
EXAMPLE necessarily commutative, consider the matrices
                                     ⎛              ⎞                 ⎛             ⎞
   1                                   1 −2        1                     2    1 −1
                                     ⎜              ⎟                 ⎜             ⎟
                               A = ⎝0       2 −1⎠ ,            B = ⎝1 −1           0⎠ .
                                       2    1      1                     2 −1      1
          From the definition of multiplication given in Eq. (9), we have
                                        ⎛                                           ⎞
                                          2−2+2          1 + 2 − 1 −1 + 0 + 1
                                        ⎜                                           ⎟
                                AB = ⎝0 + 2 − 2          0−2+1             0 + 0 − 1⎠
                                          4+1+2          2 − 1 − 1 −2 + 0 + 1
                                        ⎛               ⎞
                                         2     2      0
                                        ⎜               ⎟
                                     = ⎝0    −1     −1⎠ .
                                          7    0    −1
        Similarly, we find that                       ⎛                   ⎞
                                                       0   −3         0
                                                     ⎜                   ⎟
                                            BA = ⎝1        −4         2⎠ .
                                                       4   −5         4
        Clearly, AB = BA.
          7. Multiplication of Vectors. There are several ways of forming a product of two
        vectors x and y, each with n components. One is a direct extension to n dimensions
        of the familiar dot product from physics and calculus; we denote it by xT y and write
                                                           n
                                                 xT y =         xi yi .                             (13)
                                                          i=1
        The result of Eq. (13) is a real or complex number, and it follows directly from Eq. (13)
        that
             xT y = yT x,       xT (y + z) = xT y + xT z,            (αx)T y = α(xT y) = xT (αy).   (14)
          There is another vector product that is also defined for any two vectors having the
        same number of components. This product, denoted by (x, y), is called the scalar or
        inner product and is defined by
                                                            n
                                                (x, y) =         xi yi .                            (15)
                                                           i=1
        The scalar product is also a real or complex number, and by comparing Eqs. (13) and
        (15), we see that
                                                  (x, y) = xT y.                                    (16)
        Thus, if all the elements of y are real, then the two products (13) and (15) are identical.
        From Eq. (15) it follows that
                               (x, y) = (y, x),         (x, y + z) = (x, y) + (x, z),
                                                                                                    (17)
                             (αx, y) = α(x, y),            (x, αy) = α(x, y).
   Note that even if the vector x has elements with nonzero imaginary parts, the scalar
product of x with itself yields a nonnegative real number
                                           n            n
                               (x, x) =       xi xi =          |xi |2 .              (18)
                                          i=1           i=1
The nonnegative quantity (x, x)1/2 , often denoted by x, is called the length, or
magnitude, of x. If (x, y) = 0, then the two vectors x and y are said to be orthogonal.
For example, the unit vectors i, j, k of three-dimensional vector geometry form an
orthogonal set. On the other hand, if some of the elements of x are not real, then the
product
                                                  n
                                        x x=
                                          T
                                                      xi2                            (19)
                                                  i=1
may not be a real number.
   For example, let              ⎛       ⎞                 ⎛           ⎞
                                      i                       2−i
                                 ⎜       ⎟                 ⎜           ⎟
                            x = ⎝ −2 ⎠ ,            y = ⎝ i ⎠.
                                   1+i                           3
Then
                   xT y = (i)(2 − i) + (−2)(i) + (1 + i)(3) = 4 + 3i,
                  (x, y) = (i)(2 + i) + (−2)(−i) + (1 + i)(3) = 2 + 7i,
                   xT x = (i)2 + (−2)2 + (1 + i)2 = 3 + 2i,
                  (x, x) = (i)(−i) + (−2)(−2) + (1 + i)(1 − i) = 7.
   8. Identity. The multiplicative identity, or simply the identity matrix I, is given by
                                       ⎛                       ⎞
                                         1 0 ··· 0
                                       ⎜0 1 · · · 0⎟
                                       ⎜                       ⎟
                                 I = ⎜ .. ..                .. ⎟ .                   (20)
                                       ⎝. .                  .⎠
                                         0    0     ···     1
   From the definition of matrix multiplication, we have
                                        AI = IA = A                                  (21)
for any (square) matrix A. Hence the commutative law does hold for square matrices
if one of the matrices is the identity.
   9. Inverse. The square matrix A is said to be nonsingular or invertible if there
is another matrix B such that AB = I and BA = I, where I is the identity. If there is
such a B, it can be shown that there is only one. It is called the multiplicative inverse,
or simply the inverse, of A, and we write B = A−1 . Then
                                   AA−1 = A−1A = I.                                  (22)
Matrices that do not have an inverse are called singular or noninvertible.
   There are various ways to compute A−1 from A, assuming that it exists. One way
involves the use of determinants. Associated with each element aij of a given matrix
        is the minor Mij , which is the determinant of the matrix obtained by deleting the
        ith row and jth column of the original matrix—that is, the row and column con-
        taining aij . Also associated with each element aij is the cofactor Cij defined by the
        equation
                                                   Cij = (−1)i+j Mij .                                          (23)
        If B = A−1 , then it can be shown that the general element bij is given by
                                                                Cji
                                                        bij =        .                                          (24)
                                                              det A
           Although Eq. (24) is not an efficient way3 to calculate A−1 , it does suggest a con-
        dition that A must satisfy for it to have an inverse. In fact, the condition is both
        necessary and sufficient: A is nonsingular if and only if det A  = 0. If det A = 0, then
        A is singular.
           Another (and usually better) way to compute A−1 is by means of elementary row
        operations. There are three such operations:
        1. Interchange of two rows.
        2. Multiplication of a row by a nonzero scalar.
        3. Addition of any multiple of one row to another row.
        The transformation of a matrix by a sequence of elementary row operations is
        referred to as row reduction or Gaussian4 elimination. Any nonsingular matrix A
        can be transformed into the identity I by a systematic sequence of these operations.
        It is possible to show that if the same sequence of operations is then performed on I, it
        is transformed into A−1 . It is most efficient to perform the sequence of operations on
        both matrices at the same time by forming the augmented matrix A | I. The following
        example illustrates the calculation of an inverse matrix in this way.
        Find the inverse of
EXAMPLE                                                  ⎛              ⎞
                                                           1  −1    −1
   2                                             A = ⎝3
                                                         ⎜
                                                              −1
                                                                        ⎟
                                                                       2⎠ .
                                                           2     2     3
        3 For large n the number of multiplications required to evaluate A−1 by Eq. (24) is proportional to n!. If we
        use a more efficient method, such as the row reduction procedure described in this section, the number
        of multiplications is proportional only to n3 . Even for small values of n (such as n = 4), determinants are
        not an economical tool in calculating inverses, and row reduction methods are preferred.
        4 Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) was born in Brunswick (Germany) and spent most of his life as pro-
        fessor of astronomy and director of the Observatory at the University of Göttingen. Gauss made major
        contributions to many areas of mathematics, including number theory, algebra, non-Euclidean and dif-
        ferential geometry, and analysis, as well as to more applied fields such as geodesy, statistics, and celestial
        mechanics. He is generally considered to be among the half-dozen best mathematicians of all time.
   We begin by forming the augmented matrix A | I:
                                     ⎛                                    ⎞
                                       1 −1 −1             1     0      0
                                     ⎜                                    ⎟
                           A | I = ⎝3 −1            2      0     1      0⎠ .
                                      2       2     3      0     0      1
The matrix A can be transformed into I by the following sequence of operations, and at the
same time, I is transformed into A−1 . The result of each step appears below the statement.
(a) Obtain zeros in the off-diagonal positions in the first column by adding (−3) times the
first row to the second row and adding (−2) times the first row to the third row.
                                ⎛                                     ⎞
                                  1 −1 −1                1   0     0
                                ⎜                                     ⎟
                                ⎝0       2       5 −3        1     0⎠
                                  0      4       5 −2        0     1
(b) Obtain a 1 in the diagonal position in the second column by multiplying the second row
by 21 .
                                ⎛                                     ⎞
                                  1 −1 −1                1   0     0
                                ⎜                                     ⎟
                                ⎝0       1       5
                                                 2
                                                     − 23    1
                                                             2
                                                                   0⎠
                                  0      4       5   −2      0     1
(c) Obtain zeros in the off-diagonal positions in the second column by adding the second row
to the first row and adding (−4) times the second row to the third row.
                                ⎛                                     ⎞
                                  1      0       3
                                                 2
                                                     − 21    1
                                                             2
                                                                   0
                                ⎜                                     ⎟
                                ⎝0       1       5
                                                 2
                                                     − 23    1
                                                             2
                                                                   0⎠
                                  0      0    −5         4  −2     1
(d) Obtain a 1 in the diagonal position in the third column by multiplying the third row by
(− 15 ).
                               ⎛                                       ⎞
                                  1     0       3
                                                2
                                                    − 21      1
                                                              2
                                                                    0
                               ⎜                                       ⎟
                               ⎝0       1       5
                                                2
                                                    − 23      1
                                                              2
                                                                    0⎠
                                  0     0       1   − 45      2
                                                              5
                                                                  − 15
(e) Obtain zeros in the off-diagonal positions in the third column by adding (− 23 ) times the
third row to the first row and adding (− 25 ) times the third row to the second row.
                               ⎛                                    3 ⎞
                                 1      0       0      7
                                                      10
                                                           − 101   10
                               ⎜                                     1⎟
                               ⎝0       1       0      1
                                                       2
                                                            − 21     2⎠
                                 0      0       1   − 45       2
                                                               5
                                                                  − 15
   The last of these matrices is I | A−1 , a fact that can be verified by direct multiplication with
the original matrix A.
   This example was made slightly simpler by the fact that the given matrix A had a 1
in the upper left corner (a11 = 1). If this is not the case, then the first step is to produce
a 1 there by multiplying the first row by 1/a11 , as long as a11  = 0. If a11 = 0, then the
first row must be interchanged with some other row to bring a nonzero element
into the upper left position before proceeding. If this cannot be done, because every
element in the first column is zero, then the matrix has no inverse and is singular.
A similar situation may occur at later stages of the process as well, and the remedy
is the same: interchange the given row with a lower row so as to bring a nonzero
element to the desired diagonal location. If this cannot be done, then the original
matrix is singular.
Matrix Functions. We sometimes need to consider vectors or matrices whose elements
are functions of a real variable t. We write
                          ⎛        ⎞                    ⎛                        ⎞
                            x1 (t)                         a11 (t) · · · a1n (t)
                          ⎜        ⎟                    ⎜                    .. ⎟ ,
                  x(t) = ⎝ ... ⎠ ,           A(t) = ⎝ ...                     . ⎠      (25)
                            xn (t)                        am1 (t) · · · amn (t)
respectively.
   The matrix A(t) is said to be continuous at t = t0 or on an interval α < t < β if each
element of A is a continuous function at the given point or on the given interval.
Similarly, A(t) is said to be differentiable if each of its elements is differentiable, and
its derivative dA/dt is defined by
                                                    
                                           dA          daij
                                                 =              ;                      (26)
                                            dt          dt
that is, each element of dA/dt is the derivative of the corresponding element of A.
In the same way, the integral of a matrix function is defined as
                                  b                 b
                                      A(t) dt =             aij (t) dt .               (27)
                                   a                    a
For example, if
                                               
                                                 sin t          t
                                     A(t) =                           ,
                                                   1         cos t
then                                                                    
                                                        π
                          cos t       1                                   2   π2 /2
              A (t) =                          ,            A(t) dt =                .
                            0       − sin t             0                 π      0
Many of the rules of elementary calculus extend easily to matrix functions; in partic-
ular,
                      d              dA
                         (CA) = C         ,        where C is a constant matrix;       (28)
                      dt              dt
                  d                dA dB
                     (A + B) =           +       ;                                     (29)
                  dt                dt       dt
                      d               dB dA
                         (AB) = A          +        B.                                 (30)
                      dt              dt        dt
   In Eqs. (28) and (30), care must be taken in each term to avoid interchanging the
order of multiplication. The definitions expressed by Eqs. (26) and (27) also apply as
special cases to vectors.
   To conclude this section: some important operations on matrices are accomplished
by applying the operation separately to each element of the matrix. Examples include
         multiplication by a number, differentiation, and integration. However, this is not true
         of many other operations. For instance, the square of a matrix is not calculated by
         squaring each of its elements.
                     ⎛                ⎞           ⎛                     ⎞
PROBLEMS                 1   −2     0                  4    −2        3
                     ⎜                ⎟           ⎜                     ⎟
          1. If A = ⎝ 3        2  −1⎠ and B = ⎝−1             5       0⎠, find
                       −2      1    3                  6      1       2
             (a) 2A + B                                     (b) A − 4B
             (c) AB                                         (d) BA
                                                              
                       1+i      −1 + 2i               i       3
          2. If A =                        and B =                 , find
                      3 + 2i     2−i                  2    −2i
             (a) A −2B                                      (b) 3A + B
             (c) AB                                         (d) BA
                     ⎛                ⎞           ⎛                     ⎞
                       −2      1    2                   1      2      3
                     ⎜                ⎟           ⎜                     ⎟
          3. If A = ⎝ 1        0  −3⎠ and B = ⎝ 3           −1 −1⎠, find
                         2    −1    1               −2         1      0
             (a) AT                                         (b) BT
             (c) AT + BT                                    (d) (A + B)T
                                       
                       3 − 2i    1+i
          4. If A =                       , find
                      2−i       −2 + 3i
             (a) AT                              (b) A                                 (c) A∗
                     ⎛             ⎞            ⎛                     ⎞
                       3     2 −1                   2       1 −1
                     ⎜             ⎟            ⎜                     ⎟
          5. If A = ⎝2 −1         2⎠ and B = ⎝−2            3       3⎠, verify that 2(A + B) = 2A + 2B.
                       1     2    1                 1       0       2
                     ⎛                ⎞        ⎛                    ⎞           ⎛             ⎞
                         1 −2       0             2       1 −1                    2     1   0
                     ⎜                ⎟        ⎜                    ⎟           ⎜             ⎟
          6. If A = ⎝ 3        2 −1⎠, B = ⎝−2             3       3⎠, and C = ⎝1        2   2⎠, verify that
                       −2      0    3             1       0       2               0     1 −1
             (a) (AB)C = A(BC)                              (b) (A + B) + C = A + (B + C)
             (c) A(B + C) = AB + AC
          7. Prove each of the following laws of matrix algebra:
             (a) A + B = B + A                              (b) A + (B + C) = (A + B) + C
             (c) α(A + B) = αA + αB                         (d) (α + β)A = αA + βA
             (e) A(BC) = (AB)C                              (f) A(B + C) = AB + AC
                    ⎛      ⎞           ⎛        ⎞
                        2                −1 + i
                    ⎜      ⎟           ⎜        ⎟
          8. If x = ⎝ 3i ⎠ and y = ⎝         2 ⎠, find
                      1−i                   3−i
             (a) xT y                                       (b) yT y
             (c) (x, y)                                     (d) (y, y)
             ⎛         ⎞         ⎛         ⎞
               1 − 2i                  2
             ⎜         ⎟         ⎜         ⎟
 9. If x = ⎝ i ⎠ and y = ⎝ 3 − i ⎠, show that
                   2                1 + 2i
    (a) xT y = yT x                               (b) (x,y) = (y, x)
In each of Problems 10 through 19, either compute the inverse of the given matrix, or else
show that it is singular.
                                                              
         1      4                                        3 −1
10.                                               11.
      −2        3                                        6     2
    ⎛                   ⎞                              ⎛               ⎞
       1       2      3                                  1     1    −1
    ⎜                   ⎟                              ⎜               ⎟
12. ⎝2         4      5⎠                          13. ⎝2     −1      1⎠
       3       5      6                                  1     1     2
    ⎛                    ⎞                             ⎛                ⎞
         1       2     1                                 2      1     0
    ⎜                    ⎟                             ⎜                ⎟
14. ⎝−2          1     8⎠                         15. ⎝0        2     1⎠
         1    −2     −7                                  0      0     2
    ⎛                 ⎞                                ⎛                ⎞
       1   −1      −1                                      2      3    1
    ⎜                 ⎟                                ⎜                ⎟
16. ⎝2        1      0⎠                           17. ⎝−1         2    1⎠
       3   −2        1                                     4   −1    −1
    ⎛                         ⎞                        ⎛                        ⎞
         1       0     0   −1                              1   −1      2      0
    ⎜ 0       −1             0⎟                        ⎜−1           −4       2⎟
    ⎜                  1      ⎟                        ⎜          2             ⎟
18. ⎜                         ⎟                   19. ⎜                         ⎟
    ⎝−1          0     1     0⎠                        ⎝ 1        0    1      3⎠
         0       1   −1      1                           −2       2    0    −1
20. If A is a square matrix, and if there are two matrices B and C such that AB = I and CA = I,
    show that B = C. Thus, if a matrix has an inverse, it can have only one.
                 ⎛                     ⎞           ⎛ t                    ⎞
                     et    2e−t    e2t                2e      e−t    3e2t
                 ⎜ t                   ⎟           ⎜                      ⎟
21. If A(t) = ⎝ 2e          e−t  −e2t ⎠ and B(t) = ⎝−et      2e−t     e2t ⎠, find
                    −et    3e−t   2e2t                3et    −e−t    −e2t
    (a) A + 3B                                    (b) AB
                                                        1
    (c) dA/dt                                     (d)      A(t) dt
                                                        0
In each of Problems 22 through 24, verify that the given vector satisfies the given differential
equation.
                                  
     
             3 −2                    4 2t
22. x =                 x,     x=        e
             2 −2                    2
                                                    
     
             2    −1            1 t            1 t         1
23. x =                 x+        e,       x=     e +2        tet
             3    −2         −1                0           1
                         ⎛             ⎞             ⎛     ⎞         ⎛ ⎞
                           1    1    1                   6              0
                         ⎜             ⎟             ⎜ ⎟             ⎜ ⎟
                24. x = ⎝2     1   −1⎠ x,      x = ⎝−8⎠ e−t + 2 ⎝ 1⎠ e2t
                           0  −1     1                 −4              −1
               In each of Problems 25 and 26, verify that the given matrix satisfies the given differential
               equation.
                                                                
                           1    1                       e−3t e2t
                25.  =            ,     (t) =
                           4 −2                     −4e−3t e2t
                         ⎛               ⎞                ⎛                         ⎞
                            1 −1       4                      et      e−2t      e3t
                         ⎜               ⎟                ⎜                         ⎟
                26.  = ⎝3      2 −1⎠ ,         (t) = ⎝−4et −e−2t 2e3t ⎠
                            2    1 −1                        −et −e−2t          e3t
7.3 Systems of Linear Algebraic Equations; Linear Independence,
    Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors
               In this section we review some results from linear algebra that are important for the
               solution of systems of linear differential equations. Some of these results are easily
               proved and others are not; since we are interested simply in summarizing some useful
               information in compact form, we give no indication of proofs in either case. All the
               results in this section depend on some basic facts about the solution of systems of
               linear algebraic equations.
               Systems of Linear Algebraic Equations. A set of n simultaneous linear algebraic equations
               in n variables
                                            a11 x1 + a12 x2 + · · · + a1n xn = b1 ,
                                                                             ..
                                                                              .                       (1)
                                           an1 x1 + an2 x2 + · · · + ann xn = bn
               can be written as
                                                           Ax = b,                                    (2)
               where the n × n matrix A and the vector b are given, and the components of x are
               to be determined. If b = 0, the system is said to be homogeneous; otherwise, it is
               nonhomogeneous.
                  If the coefficient matrix A is nonsingular—that is, if det A is not zero—then there
               is a unique solution of the system (2). Since A is nonsingular, A−1 exists, and the
               solution can be found by multiplying each side of Eq. (2) on the left by A−1 ; thus
                                                         x = A−1 b.                                   (3)
               In particular, the homogeneous problem Ax = 0, corresponding to b = 0 in Eq. (2),
               has only the trivial solution x = 0.
           On the other hand, if A is singular—that is, if det A is zero—then solutions of
        Eq. (2) either do not exist, or do exist but are not unique. Since A is singular, A−1
        does not exist, so Eq. (3) is no longer valid. The homogeneous system
                                                   Ax = 0                                      (4)
        has (infinitely many) nonzero solutions in addition to the trivial solution. The situ-
        ation for the nonhomogeneous system (2) is more complicated. This system has no
        solution unless the vector b satisfies a certain further condition. This condition is that
                                                 (b, y) = 0,                                   (5)
        for all vectors y satisfying A∗ y = 0, where A∗ is the adjoint of A. If condition (5) is
        met, then the system (2) has (infinitely many) solutions. These solutions are of the
        form
                                                x = x(0) + ξ,                                  (6)
        where x(0) is a particular solution of Eq. (2), and ξ is the most general solution of the
        homogeneous system (4). Note the resemblance between Eq. (6) and the solution of
        a nonhomogeneous linear differential equation. The proofs of some of the preceding
        statements are outlined in Problems 26 through 30.
          The results in the preceding paragraph are important as a means of classifying the
        solutions of linear systems. However, for solving particular systems, it is generally best
        to use row reduction to transform the system into a much simpler one from which
        the solution(s), if there are any, can be written down easily. To do this efficiently, we
        can form the augmented matrix
                                               ⎛                        ⎞
                                                 a11   ···   a1n    b1
                                      A|b = ⎝ .
                                               ⎜ ..           ..     .. ⎟
                                                               .      .⎠                       (7)
                                                 an1   · · · ann    bn
        by adjoining the vector b to the coefficient matrix A as an additional column. The
        vertical line replaces the equals sign and is said to partition the augmented matrix.
        We now perform row operations on the augmented matrix so as to transform A into
        an upper triangular matrix—that is, a matrix whose elements below the main diagonal
        are all zero. Once this is done, it is easy to see whether the system has solutions, and
        to find them if it does. Observe that elementary row operations on the augmented
        matrix (7) correspond to legitimate operations on the equations in the system (1).
        The following examples illustrate the process.
        Solve the system of equations
EXAMPLE
                                             x1 − 2x2 + 3x3 =    7,
   1
                                          −x1 + x2 − 2x3 = −5,                                 (8)
                                           2x1 − x2 − x3 =       4.
   The augmented matrix for the system (8) is
                                   ⎛                       ⎞
                                       1 −2         3    7
                                   ⎜                       ⎟
                                   ⎝−1        1 −2      −5⎠ .                              (9)
                                       2 −1 −1           4
   We now perform row operations on the matrix (9) with a view to introducing zeros in the
lower left part of the matrix. Each step is described and the result recorded below.
(a) Add the first row to the second row, and add (−2) times the first row to the third row.
                                        ⎛                     ⎞
                                          1 −2        3      7
                                        ⎜                     ⎟
                                        ⎝0 −1         1      2⎠
                                          0      3 −7 −10
(b) Multiply the second row by −1.
                                        ⎛                     ⎞
                                          1    −2     3      7
                                        ⎜                     ⎟
                                        ⎝0       1  −1     −2⎠
                                          0      3  −7   −10
(c) Add (−3) times the second row to the third row.
                                        ⎛                     ⎞
                                           1    −2     3    7
                                        ⎜                     ⎟
                                        ⎝0       1   −1   −2⎠
                                           0     0   −4   −4
(d) Divide the third row by −4.
                                        ⎛                     ⎞
                                           1    −2     3    7
                                        ⎜                     ⎟
                                        ⎝  0     1   −1   −2⎠
                                           0     0     1    1
   The matrix obtained in this manner corresponds to the system of equations
                                     x1 − 2x2 + 3x3 =    7,
                                             x2 − x3 = −2,                               (10)
                                                   x3 =  1,
which is equivalent to the original system (8). Note that the coefficients in Eqs. (10) form
a triangular matrix. From the last of Eqs. (10) we have x3 = 1, from the second equation
x2 = −2 + x3 = −1, and from the first equation x1 = 7 + 2x2 − 3x3 = 2. Thus we obtain
                                                ⎛    ⎞
                                                   2
                                                ⎜ ⎟
                                          x = ⎝−1⎠ ,
                                                   1
which is the solution of the given system (8). Incidentally, since the solution is unique, we
conclude that the coefficient matrix is nonsingular.
        Discuss solutions of the system
EXAMPLE
                                                  x1 − 2x2 + 3x3 = b1 ,
   2
                                                 −x1 + x2 − 2x3 = b2 ,                                  (11)
                                                 2x1 − x2 + 3x3 = b3
        for various values of b1 , b2 , and b3 .
            Observe that the coefficients in the system (11) are the same as those in the system (8) except
        for the coefficient of x3 in the third equation. The augmented matrix for the system (11) is
                                                ⎛                     ⎞
                                                    1  −2      3   b1
                                                ⎜                     ⎟
                                                ⎝−1      1   −2    b2 ⎠ .                               (12)
                                                    2  −1      3   b3
        By performing steps (a), (b), and (c) as in Example 1, we transform the matrix (12) into
                                          ⎛                                ⎞
                                            1    −2     3         b1
                                          ⎜                                ⎟
                                          ⎝0      1   −1      −b1 − b2 ⎠ .                              (13)
                                            0     0     0   b1 + 3b2 + b3
        The equation corresponding to the third row of the matrix (13) is
                                                  b1 + 3b2 + b3 = 0;                                    (14)
        thus the system (11) has no solution unless the condition (14) is satisfied by b1 , b2 , and b3 . It is
        possible to show that this condition is just Eq. (5) for the system (11).
            Let us now assume that b1 = 2, b2 = 1, and b3 = −5, in which case Eq. (14) is satisfied. Then
        the first two rows of the matrix (13) correspond to the equations
                                                 x1 − 2x2 + 3x3 =    2,
                                                                                                        (15)
                                                       x2 − x3 = −3.
        To solve the system (15), we can choose one of the unknowns arbitrarily and then solve for
        the other two. If we let x3 = α, where α is arbitrary, it then follows that
                                          x2 = α − 3,
                                          x1 = 2(α − 3) − 3α + 2 = −α − 4.
        If we write the solution in vector notation, we have
                                             ⎛        ⎞      ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞
                                               −α − 4          −1         −4
                                             ⎜        ⎟      ⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟
                                        x = ⎝ α − 3⎠ = α ⎝ 1⎠ + ⎝−3⎠ .                                  (16)
                                                  α              1         0
        It is easy to verify that the second term on the right side of Eq. (16) is a solution of the nonho-
        mogeneous system (11) and that the first term is the most general solution of the homogeneous
        system corresponding to (11).
            Row reduction is also useful in solving homogeneous systems and systems in which
        the number of equations is different from the number of unknowns.
        Linear Dependence and Independence. A set of k vectors x(1) , . . . , x(k) is said to be linearly
        dependent if there exists a set of real or complex numbers c1 , . . . , ck , at least one of
        which is nonzero, such that
                                              c1 x(1) + · · · + ck x(k) = 0.                             (17)
        In other words, x(1) , . . . , x(k) are linearly dependent if there is a linear relation among
        them. On the other hand, if the only set c1 , . . . , ck for which Eq. (17) is satisfied is
        c1 = c2 = · · · = ck = 0, then x(1) , . . . , x(k) are said to be linearly independent.
                                                                                                       (j)
           Consider now a set of n vectors, each of which has n components. Let xij = xi be
        the ith component of the vector x(j) , and let X = (xij ). Then Eq. (17) can be written as
                          ⎛ (1)                         ⎞ ⎛                              ⎞
                            x1 c1 + · · · + x1(n) cn            x11 c1 + · · · + x1n cn
                          ⎜ ..                     .. ⎟ ⎜ ..                         .. ⎟
                          ⎝ .                       . ⎠=⎝ .                           . ⎠ = 0,
                            xn(1) c1 + · · · + xn(n) cn         xn1 c1 + · · · + xnn cn
        or, equivalently,
                                                          Xc = 0.                                        (18)
        If det X  = 0, then the only solution of Eq. (18) is c = 0, but if det X = 0, there are
        nonzero solutions. Thus the set of vectors x(1) , . . . , x(n) is linearly independent if and
        only if det X  = 0.
        Determine whether the vectors
EXAMPLE                                 ⎛ ⎞                    ⎛ ⎞                  ⎛      ⎞
                                            1                    2                      −4
   3                                    ⎜ ⎟
                               x(1) = ⎝ 2⎠ ,
                                                               ⎜ ⎟
                                                        x(2) = ⎝1⎠ ,
                                                                                    ⎜
                                                                             x(3) = ⎝ 1⎠
                                                                                           ⎟
                                                                                                          (19)
                                          −1                     3                     −11
        are linearly independent or linearly dependent. If they are linearly dependent, find a linear
        relation among them.
           To determine whether x(1) , x(2) , and x(3) are linearly dependent, we seek constants c1 , c2 , and
        c3 such that
                                              c1 x(1) + c2 x(2) + c3 x(3) = 0.                            (20)
        Equation (20) can also be written in the form
                                           ⎛                    ⎞⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞
                                               1      2      −4     c1          0
                                           ⎜                    ⎟⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟
                                           ⎝ 2        1       1⎠ ⎝c2 ⎠ = ⎝0⎠                              (21)
                                             −1       3 −11         c3          0
        and solved by means of elementary row operations starting from the augmented matrix
                                                ⎛                          ⎞
                                                     1      2    −4      0
                                                ⎜                          ⎟
                                                ⎝    2      1      1     0⎠ .                             (22)
                                                  −1        3   −11      0
        We proceed as in Examples 1 and 2.
(a) Add (−2) times the first row to the second row, and add the first row to the third row.
                                                     ⎛                    ⎞
                                                       1     2     −4 0
                                                     ⎜                    ⎟
                                                     ⎝0 −3           9 0⎠
                                                      0      5 −15 0
(b) Divide the second row by −3; then add (−5) times the second row to the third row.
                                                     ⎛                   ⎞
                                                       1      2  −4    0
                                                     ⎜                   ⎟
                                                     ⎝ 0      1  −3    0⎠
                                                       0      0     0  0
   Thus we obtain the equivalent system
                                                c1 + 2c2 − 4c3 = 0,
                                                                                              (23)
                                                         c2 − 3c3 = 0.
From the second of Eqs. (23) we have c2 = 3c3 , and then from the first we obtain
c1 = 4c3 − 2c2 = −2c3 . Thus we have solved for c1 and c2 in terms of c3 , with the latter remain-
ing arbitrary. If we choose c3 = −1 for convenience, then c1 = 2 and c2 = −3. In this case the
relation (20) becomes
                                              2x(1) − 3x(2) − x(3) = 0,
and the given vectors are linearly dependent.
   Alternatively, we can compute det(xij ), whose columns are the components of x(1), x(2), and
x(3), respectively. Thus
                                                                           
                                                          1
                                                                 2     −4
                                            det(xij ) =  2      1       1
                                                         −1      3 −11
and direct calculation shows that it is zero. Hence x(1), x(2), and x(3) are linearly dependent.
However, if the coefficients c1 , c2 , and c3 are required, we still need to solve Eq. (20) to find
them.
   Frequently, it is useful to think of the columns (or rows) of a matrix A as vectors.
These column (or row) vectors are linearly independent if and only if det A = 0.
Further, if C = AB, then it can be shown that det C = (det A)(det B). Therefore, if
the columns (or rows) of both A and B are linearly independent, then the columns
(or rows) of C are also linearly independent.
   Now let us extend the concepts of linear dependence and independence to a set
of vector functions x(1) (t), . . . , x(k) (t) defined on an interval α < t < β. The vectors
x(1) (t), . . . , x(k) (t) are said to be linearly dependent on α < t < β if there exists a set
of constants c1 , . . . , ck , not all of which are zero, such that
                        c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + ck x(k) (t) = 0     for all t in the interval.
Otherwise, x(1) (t), . . . , x(k) (t) are said to be linearly independent. Note that if
x(1) (t), . . . , x(k) (t) are linearly dependent on an interval, they are linearly dependent
at each point in the interval. However, if x(1) (t), . . . , x(k) (t) are linearly independent
on an interval, they may or may not be linearly independent at each point; they may,
        in fact, be linearly dependent at each point, but with different sets of constants at
        different points. See Problem 15 for an example.
        Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors. The equation
                                                       Ax = y                                              (24)
        can be viewed as a linear transformation that maps (or transforms) a given vector x
        into a new vector y. Vectors that are transformed into multiples of themselves are
        important in many applications.5 To find such vectors, we set y = λx, where λ is a
        scalar proportionality factor, and seek solutions of the equation
                                                      Ax = λx,                                             (25)
        or
                                                  (A − λI)x = 0.                                           (26)
        The latter equation has nonzero solutions if and only if λ is chosen so that
                                                 det(A − λI) = 0.                                          (27)
        Equation (27) is a polynomial equation of degree n in λ and is called the characteristic
        equation of the matrix A. Values of λ that satisfy Eq. (27) may be either real- or
        complex-valued and are called eigenvalues of A. The nonzero solutions of Eq. (25)
        or (26) that are obtained by using such a value of λ are called the eigenvectors
        corresponding to that eigenvalue.
           If A is a 2 × 2 matrix, then Eq. (26) is
                                                                         
                                          a11 − λ       a12        x1         0
                                                                        =                                  (28)
                                            a21      a22 − λ       x2         0
        and Eq. (27) becomes
                                         (a11 − λ)(a22 − λ) − a12 a21 = 0,
        or
                                   λ2 − (a11 + a22 )λ + a11 a22 − a12 a21 = 0.                             (29)
        The following example illustrates how eigenvalues and eigenvectors are found.
        Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix
EXAMPLE                                                          
                                                           3 −1
   4                                               A=
                                                           4 −2
                                                                    .                                       (30)
           The eigenvalues λ and eigenvectors x satisfy the equation (A − λI)x = 0, or
                                                               
                                            3−λ       −1         x1       0
                                                                      =       .                             (31)
                                              4     −2 − λ       x2       0
        5 For example, this problem is encountered in finding the principal axes of stress or strain in an elastic
        body, and in finding the modes of free vibration in a conservative system with a finite number of degrees
        of freedom.
The eigenvalues are the roots of the equation
                                               
                               3 − λ
                                          −1 
               det(A − λI) =                    = λ2 − λ − 2 = (λ − 2)(λ + 1) = 0.          (32)
                                4       −2 − λ
Thus the eigenvalues are λ1 = 2 and λ2 = −1.
   To find the eigenvectors, we return to Eq. (31) and replace λ by each of the eigenvalues in
turn. For λ = 2 we have                          
                                        1 −1       x1         0
                                                        =        .                            (33)
                                        4 −4       x2         0
Hence each row of this vector equation leads to the condition x1 − x2 = 0, so x1 and x2 are
equal but their value is not determined. If x1 = c, then x2 = c also, and the eigenvector x(1) is
                                               
                                       (1)      1
                                      x =c          ,     c  = 0.                            (34)
                                                1
Thus there is an infinite family of eigenvectors, indexed by the arbitrary constant c, correspond-
ing to the eigenvalue λ1 . We will choose a single member of this family as a representative of
the rest; in this example it seems simplest to let c = 1. Then, instead of Eq. (34), we write
                                                      
                                              (1)     1
                                             x =                                              (35)
                                                      1
and remember that any nonzero multiple of this vector is also an eigenvector. We say that x(1)
is the eigenvector corresponding to the eigenvalue λ1 = 2.
    Now, setting λ = −1 in Eq. (31), we obtain
                                                 
                                        4 −1       x1         0
                                                        =        .                            (36)
                                        4 −1       x2         0
Again we obtain a single condition on x1 and x2 , namely, 4x1 − x2 = 0. Thus the eigenvector
corresponding to the eigenvalue λ2 = −1 is
                                                      
                                              (2)     1
                                             x =                                              (37)
                                                      4
or any nonzero multiple of this vector.
   As Example 4 illustrates, eigenvectors are determined only up to an arbitrary
nonzero multiplicative constant; if this constant is specified in some way, then the
eigenvectors are said to be normalized. In Example 4, we chose the constant c so
that the components of the eigenvectors would be small integers. However, any
other choice of c is equally valid, although perhaps less convenient. Sometimes it
is useful to normalize an eigenvector x by choosing the constant so that its length
x = (x, x)1/2 = 1.
    Since the characteristic equation (27) for an n × n matrix A is a polynomial equa-
tion of degree n in λ, each such matrix has n eigenvalues λ1 , . . . , λn , some of which
may be repeated. If a given eigenvalue appears m times as a root of Eq. (27), then
that eigenvalue is said to have algebraic multiplicity m. Each eigenvalue has at least
one associated eigenvector, and an eigenvalue of algebraic multiplicity m may have q
        linearly independent eigenvectors. The integer q is called the geometric multiplicity
        of the eigenvalue, and it is possible to show that
                                                     1 ≤ q ≤ m.                                  (38)
        Further, examples demonstrate that q may be any integer in this interval. If each
        eigenvalue of A is simple (has algebraic multiplicity 1), then each eigenvalue also has
        geometric multiplicity 1.
           It is possible to show that if λ1 and λ2 are two eigenvalues of A and if λ1 = λ2 , then
        their corresponding eigenvectors x(1) and x(2) are linearly independent (Problem 34).
        This result extends to any set λ1 , . . . , λk of distinct eigenvalues: their eigenvectors
        x(1) , . . . , x(k) are linearly independent. Thus, if each eigenvalue of an n × n matrix
        is simple, then the n eigenvectors of A, one for each eigenvalue, are linearly inde-
        pendent. On the other hand, if A has one or more repeated eigenvalues, then there
        may be fewer than n linearly independent eigenvectors associated with A, since for a
        repeated eigenvalue we may have q < m. As we will see in Section 7.8, this fact may
        lead to complications later on in the solution of systems of differential equations.
        Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix
EXAMPLE                                              ⎛                ⎞
                                                       0      1      1
   5                                                 ⎜
                                                A = ⎝1        0
                                                                      ⎟
                                                                     1⎠ .                         (39)
                                                       1      1      0
           The eigenvalues λ and eigenvectors x satisfy the equation (A − λI)x = 0, or
                                           ⎛                ⎞⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞
                                             −λ     1      1     x1       0
                                           ⎜                ⎟⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟
                                           ⎝ 1 −λ          1⎠ ⎝x2 ⎠ = ⎝0⎠ .                       (40)
                                              1     1 −λ         x3       0
        The eigenvalues are the roots of the equation
                                                                 
                                                −λ
                                                        1      1
                                                                 
                                  det(A − λI) =  1 −λ          1 = −λ3 + 3λ + 2 = 0.            (41)
                                                                 
                                                 1      1 −λ
        The roots of Eq. (41) are λ1 = 2, λ2 = −1, and λ3 = −1. Thus 2 is a simple eigenvalue, and −1
        is an eigenvalue of algebraic multiplicity 2, or a double eigenvalue.
           To find the eigenvector x(1) corresponding to the eigenvalue λ1 , we substitute λ = 2 in
        Eq. (40); this gives the system
                                           ⎛                ⎞⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞
                                             −2     1     1      x1       0
                                           ⎜                ⎟⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟
                                           ⎝  1   −2      1 ⎠ ⎝ 2 ⎠ ⎝0⎠ .
                                                                 x    =                           (42)
                                              1     1 −2         x3       0
        We can reduce this to the equivalent system
                                            ⎛               ⎞⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞
                                              2 −1 −1           x1        0
                                            ⎜               ⎟⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟
                                            ⎝0     1 −1⎠ ⎝x2 ⎠ = ⎝0⎠                              (43)
                                              0    0      0     x3        0
by elementary row operations. Solving this system yields the eigenvector
                                                        ⎛ ⎞
                                                         1
                                                        ⎜ ⎟
                                                 x(1) = ⎝1⎠ .                                    (44)
                                                         1
   For λ = −1, Eqs. (40) reduce immediately to the single equation
                                              x1 + x2 + x3 = 0.                                  (45)
Thus values for two of the quantities x1 , x2 , x3 can be chosen arbitrarily, and the third is
determined from Eq. (45). For example, if x1 = c1 and x2 = c2 , then x3 = −c1 − c2 . In vector
notation we have
                                 ⎛             ⎞       ⎛      ⎞      ⎛       ⎞
                                        c1                  1             0
                                 ⎜             ⎟       ⎜      ⎟      ⎜       ⎟
                          x=⎝           c2     ⎠ = c1 ⎝ 0 ⎠ + c2 ⎝ 1 ⎠ .                         (46)
                                     −c1 − c2             −1             −1
For example, by choosing c1 = 1 and c2 = 0, we obtain the eigenvector
                                                       ⎛ ⎞
                                                          1
                                                 (2)   ⎜ ⎟
                                               x = ⎝ 0⎠ .                                        (47)
                                                         −1
Any nonzero multiple of x(2) is also an eigenvector, but a second independent eigenvector can
be found by making another choice of c1 and c2 —for instance, c1 = 0 and c2 = 1. In this case
we obtain                                              ⎛ ⎞
                                                          0
                                                       ⎜ ⎟
                                               x(3) = ⎝ 1⎠ ,                                     (48)
                                                         −1
which is linearly independent of x(2) . Therefore, in this example, two linearly independent
eigenvectors are associated with the double eigenvalue.
   An important special class of matrices, called self-adjoint or Hermitian matrices,
are those for which A∗ = A; that is, aji = aij . Hermitian matrices include as a subclass
real symmetric matrices—that is, matrices that have real elements and for which
AT = A. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of Hermitian matrices always have the
following useful properties:
1. All eigenvalues are real.
2. There always exists a full set of n linearly independent eigenvectors, regardless of the
    algebraic multiplicities of the eigenvalues.
3. If x(1) and x(2) are eigenvectors that correspond to different eigenvalues, then
    (x(1) , x(2) ) = 0. Thus, if all eigenvalues are simple, then the associated eigenvectors form an
    orthogonal set of vectors.
4. Corresponding to an eigenvalue of algebraic multiplicity m, it is possible to choose m
    eigenvectors that are mutually orthogonal. Thus the full set of n eigenvectors can always
    be chosen to be orthogonal as well as linearly independent.
   The proofs of statements 1 and 3 above are outlined in Problems 32 and 33. Example
5 involves a real symmetric matrix and illustrates properties 1, 2, and 3, but the choice
we have made for x(2) and x(3) does not illustrate property 4. However, it is always
possible to choose an x(2) and x(3) so that (x(2) , x(3) ) = 0. For instance, in Example 5
         we could have chosen x(2) as before and x(3) by using c1 = 1 and c2 = −2 in Eq. (46).
         In this way we obtain
                                                          ⎛ ⎞                        ⎛ ⎞
                                                              1                          1
                                                          ⎜ ⎟                        ⎜ ⎟
                                               x(2) = ⎝ 0⎠ ,                x(3) = ⎝−2⎠
                                                            −1                           1
         as the eigenvectors associated with the eigenvalue λ = −1. These eigenvectors are
         orthogonal to each other as well as to the eigenvector x(1) that corresponds to the
         eigenvalue λ = 2.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, either solve the given system of equations, or else show that
         there is no solution.
           1.     x1           − x3 = 0                                  2.    x1 + 2x2 − x3 = 1
                3x1 + x2 + x3 = 1                                             2x1 + x2 + x3 = 1
               −x1 + x2 + 2x3 = 2                                              x1 − x2 + 2x3 = 1
           3.     x1 + 2x2 − x3 =           2                            4.    x1 + 2x2 − x3 = 0
                2x1 + x2 + x3 =             1                                 2x1 + x2 + x3 = 0
                  x1 − x2 + 2x3 = −1                                           x1 − x2 + 2x3 = 0
           5.     x1           − x3 = 0                                  6.       x1 + 2x2 − x3 = −2
                3x1 + x2 + x3 = 0                                             −2x1 − 4x2 + 2x3 = 4
                −x1 + x2 + 2x3 = 0                                              2x1 + 4x2 − 2x3 = −4
         In each of Problems 7 through 11, determine whether the members of the given set of vectors
         are linearly independent. If they are linearly dependent, find a linear relation among them.
         The vectors are written as row vectors to save space but may be considered as column vectors;
         that is, the transposes of the given vectors may be used instead of the vectors themselves.
           7. x(1) = (1, 1, 0),          x(2) = (0, 1, 1),        x(3) = (1, 0, 1)
           8. x(1) = (2, 1, 0),          x(2) = (0, 1, 0),        x(3) = (−1, 2, 0)
           9. x(1) = (1, 2, 2, 3),         x(2) = (−1, 0, 3, 1),          x(3) = (−2, −1, 1, 0),       x(4) = (−3, 0, −1, 3)
         10. x(1) = (1, 2, −1, 0),            x(2) = (2, 3, 1, −1),         x(3) = (−1, 0, 2, 2),      x(4) = (3, −1, 1, 3)
         11. x(1) = (1, 2, −2),            x(2) = (3, 1, 0),        x(3) = (2, −1, 1),        x(4) = (4, 3, −2)
         12. Suppose that each of the vectors x(1) , . . . , x(m) has n components, where n < m. Show that
              x(1) , . . . , x(m) are linearly dependent.
         In each of Problems 13 and 14, determine whether the members of the given set of vectors are
         linearly independent for −∞ < t < ∞. If they are linearly dependent, find the linear relation
         among them. As in Problems 7 through 11, the vectors are written as row vectors to save space.
         13. x(1) (t) = (e−t , 2e−t ),         x(2) (t) = (e−t , e−t ),      x(3) (t) = (3e−t , 0)
         14. x(1) (t) = (2 sin t, sin t),          x(2) (t) = (sin t, 2 sin t)
15. Let
                                                                    
                                                et                     1
                                   x(1) (t) =      ,     x(2) (t) =        .
                                               tet                     t
    Show that x(1) (t) and x(2) (t) are linearly dependent at each point in the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 1.
    Nevertheless, show that x(1) (t) and x(2) (t) are linearly independent on 0 ≤ t ≤ 1.
In each of Problems 16 through 25, find all eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the given matrix.
                                                                
      5   −1                                              3    −2
16.                                                 17.
      3     1                                            4     −1
                                                                  
      −2      1                                             1      i
18.                                                 19.
        1   −2                                            −i       1
           √                                                          
        1     3                                           −3        3/4
20.   √                                             21.
        3   −1                                            −5           1
    ⎛               ⎞                                   ⎛                    ⎞
      1     0     0                                          3      2      2
    ⎜               ⎟                                   ⎜                    ⎟
22. ⎝2      1    −2⎠                                23. ⎝ 1         4      1⎠
      3     2     1                                       −2      −4     −1
    ⎛                         ⎞                         ⎛                   ⎞
       11/9     −2/9      8/9                             3       2       4
    ⎜                         ⎟                         ⎜                   ⎟
24. ⎝−2/9        2/9     10/9⎠                      25. ⎝2        0       2⎠
        8/9     10/9      5/9                             4       2       3
Problems 26 through 30 deal with the problem of solving Ax = b when det A = 0.
26. (a) Suppose that A is a real-valued n × n matrix. Show that (Ax, y) = (x, AT y) for any
    vectors x and y.
    Hint: You may find it simpler to consider first the case n = 2; then extend the result to an
    arbitrary value of n.
    (b) If A is not necessarily real, show that (Ax, y) = (x, A∗ y) for any vectors x and y.
    (c) If A is Hermitian, show that (Ax, y) = (x, Ay) for any vectors x and y.
27. Suppose that, for a given matrix A, there is a nonzero vector x such that Ax = 0. Show
    that there is also a nonzero vector y such that A∗ y = 0.
28. Suppose that det A = 0 and that Ax = b has solutions. Show that (b, y) = 0, where y is any
    solution of A∗ y = 0. Verify that this statement is true for the set of equations in Example 2.
    Hint: Use the result of Problem 26(b).
29. Suppose that det A = 0 and that x = x(0) is a solution of Ax = b. Show that if ξ is a solution
    of Aξ = 0 and α is any constant, then x = x(0) + αξ is also a solution of Ax = b.
30. Suppose that det A = 0 and that y is a solution of A∗ y = 0. Show that if (b, y) = 0 for every
    such y, then Ax = b has solutions. Note that this is the converse of Problem 28; the form
    of the solution is given by Problem 29.
    Hint: What does the relation A∗ y = 0 say about the rows of A? Again, it may be helpful
    to consider the case n = 2 first.
               31. Prove that λ = 0 is an eigenvalue of A if and only if A is singular.
               32. In this problem we show that the eigenvalues of a Hermitian matrix A are real. Let x be
                    an eigenvector corresponding to the eigenvalue λ.
                    (a) Show that (Ax, x) = (x, Ax). Hint: See Problem 26(c).
                    (b) Show that λ(x, x) = λ(x, x). Hint: Recall that Ax = λx.
                    (c) Show that λ = λ; that is, the eigenvalue λ is real.
               33. Show that if λ1 and λ2 are eigenvalues of a Hermitian matrix A, and if λ1 = λ2 , then the
                    corresponding eigenvectors x(1) and x(2) are orthogonal.
                    Hint: Use the results of Problems 26(c) and 32 to show that (λ1 − λ2 )(x(1) , x(2) ) = 0.
               34. Show that if λ1 and λ2 are eigenvalues of any matrix A, and if λ1  = λ2 , then the corre-
                    sponding eigenvectors x(1) and x(2) are linearly independent.
                    Hint: Start from c1 x(1) + c2 x(2) = 0; multiply by A to obtain c1 λ1 x(1) + c2 λ2 x(2) = 0. Then
                    show that c1 = c2 = 0.
7.4 Basic Theory of Systems of First Order Linear Equations
               The general theory of a system of n first order linear equations
                                             x1 = p11 (t)x1 + · · · + p1n (t)xn + g1 (t),
                                                 ..
                                                  .                                                               (1)
                                             xn = pn1 (t)x1 + · · · + pnn (t)xn + gn (t)
               closely parallels that of a single linear equation of nth order. The discussion in this
               section therefore follows the same general lines as that in Sections 3.2 and 4.1.
               To discuss the system (1) most effectively, we write it in matrix notation. That is, we
               consider x1 = φ1 (t), . . . , xn = φn (t) to be components of a vector x = φ(t); similarly,
               g1 (t), . . . , gn (t) are components of a vector g(t), and p11 (t), . . . , pnn (t) are elements of
               an n × n matrix P(t). Equation (1) then takes the form
                                                         x = P(t)x + g(t).                                       (2)
               The use of vectors and matrices not only saves a great deal of space and facilitates
               calculations but also emphasizes the similarity between systems of equations and
               single (scalar) equations.
                  A vector x = φ(t) is said to be a solution of Eq. (2) if its components satisfy the sys-
               tem of equations (1). Throughout this section we assume that P and g are continuous
               on some interval α < t < β; that is, each of the scalar functions p11 , . . . , pnn , g1 , . . . , gn
               is continuous there. According to Theorem 7.1.2, this is sufficient to guarantee the
               existence of solutions of Eq. (2) on the interval α < t < β.
                  It is convenient to consider first the homogeneous equation
                                                             x = P(t)x                                           (3)
               obtained from Eq. (2) by setting g(t) = 0. Once the homogeneous equation has been
               solved, there are several methods that can be used to solve the nonhomogeneous
              equation (2); this is taken up in Section 7.9. We use the notation
                                            ⎛         ⎞                        ⎛          ⎞
                                              x11 (t)                             x1k (t)
                                            ⎜x21 (t)⎟                          ⎜x2k (t)⎟
                                            ⎜         ⎟                        ⎜          ⎟
                                 x(1) (t) = ⎜ .. ⎟ ,        ...,   x(k) (t) = ⎜ .. ⎟ ,         ...     (4)
                                            ⎝ . ⎠                              ⎝ . ⎠
                                              xn1 (t)                             xnk (t)
                                                                                                   (j)
              to designate specific solutions of the system (3). Note that xij (t) = xi (t) refers to
              the ith component of the jth solution x(j) (t). The main facts about the structure of
              solutions of the system (3) are stated in Theorems 7.4.1 to 7.4.5. They closely resemble
              the corresponding theorems in Sections 3.2 and 4.1; some of the proofs are left to
              you as exercises.
Theorem 7.4.1 If the vector functions x(1) and x(2) are solutions of the system (3), then the linear
              combination c1 x(1) + c2 x(2) is also a solution for any constants c1 and c2 .
                 This is the principle of superposition; it is proved simply by differentiating
              c1 x(1) + c2 x(2) and using the fact that x(1) and x(2) satisfy Eq. (3). As an example,
              it can be verified that
                                        3t                                                
                             (1)          e          1 3t          (2)              e−t         1 −t
                           x (t) =             =        e ,       x (t) =                  =       e   (5)
                                         2e3t        2                         −2e−t           −2
              satisfy the equation
                                                             
                                                               1      1
                                                       x =                x.                          (6)
                                                               4      1
              Then, according to Theorem 7.4.1,
                                                                       
                                                          1 3t               1 −t
                                               x = c1         e + c2            e
                                                          2               −2
                                                  = c1 x(1) (t) + c2 x(2) (t)                          (7)
              also satisfies Eq. (6).
                 By repeated application of Theorem 7.4.1, we can conclude that if x(1) , . . . , x(k) are
              solutions of Eq. (3), then
                                               x = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + ck x(k) (t)                   (8)
              is also a solution for any constants c1 , . . . , ck . Thus every finite linear combination
              of solutions of Eq. (3) is also a solution. The question that now arises is whether all
              solutions of Eq. (3) can be found in this way. By analogy with previous cases, it is
              reasonable to expect that for the system (3) of n first order equations, it is sufficient to
              form linear combinations of n properly chosen solutions. Therefore, let x(1) , . . . , x(n)
              be n solutions of the system (3), and consider the matrix X(t) whose columns are the
              vectors x(1) (t), . . . , x(n) (t):
                                                             ⎛                              ⎞
                                                                x11 (t) · · · x1n (t)
                                                             ⎜ .                       .. ⎟
                                                  X(t) = ⎝ ..                           . ⎠.                       (9)
                                                                xn1 (t)    ···     xnn (t)
              Recall from Section 7.3 that the columns of X(t) are linearly independent for a given
              value of t if and only if det X  = 0 for that value of t. This determinant is called the
              Wronskian of the n solutions x(1) , . . . , x(n) and is also denoted by W[x(1) , . . . , x(n) ];
              that is,
                                                   W[x(1) , . . . , x(n) ](t) = det X(t).                         (10)
              The solutions x(1) , . . . , x(n) are then linearly independent at a point if and only if
              W[ x(1) , . . . , x(n) ] is not zero there.
Theorem 7.4.2 If the vector functions x(1) , . . . , x(n) are linearly independent solutions of the sys-
              tem (3) for each point in the interval α < t < β, then each solution x = φ(t) of the
              system (3) can be expressed as a linear combination of x(1) , . . . , x(n)
                                                  φ(t) = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cn x(n) (t)                       (11)
              in exactly one way.
                  Before proving Theorem 7.4.2, note that according to Theorem 7.4.1, all expres-
              sions of the form (11) are solutions of the system (3), while by Theorem 7.4.2 all
              solutions of Eq. (3) can be written in the form (11). If the constants c1 , . . . , cn are
              thought of as arbitrary, then Eq. (11) includes all solutions of the system (3), and it is
              customary to call it the general solution. Any set of solutions x(1) , . . . , x(n) of Eq. (3)
              that is linearly independent at each point in the interval α < t < β is said to be a
              fundamental set of solutions for that interval.
                 To prove Theorem 7.4.2, we will show that any solution φ of Eq. (3) can be written
              as φ(t) = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cn x(n) (t) for suitable values of c1 , . . . , cn . Let t = t0 be some
              point in the interval α < t < β and let ξ = φ(t0 ). We now wish to determine whether
              there is any solution of the form x = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cn x(n) (t) that also satisfies the
              same initial condition x(t0 ) = ξ. That is, we wish to know whether there are values of
              c1 , . . . , cn such that
                                                   c1 x(1) (t0 ) + · · · + cn x(n) (t0 ) = ξ,                     (12)
              or, in scalar form,
                                                   c1 x11 (t0 ) + · · · + cn x1n (t0 ) = ξ1 ,
                                                                                         ..
                                                                                          .                       (13)
                                                  c1 xn1 (t0 ) + · · · + cn xnn (t0 ) = ξn .
              The necessary and sufficient condition that Eqs. (13) possess a unique solution
              c1 , . . . , cn is precisely the nonvanishing of the determinant of coefficients, which is
              the Wronskian W[ x(1) , . . . , x(n) ] evaluated at t = t0 . The hypothesis that x(1) , . . . , x(n)
              are linearly independent throughout α < t < β guarantees that W[x(1) , . . . , x(n) ] is
              not zero at t = t0 , and therefore there is a (unique) solution of Eq. (3) of the form
              x = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cn x(n) (t) that also satisfies the initial condition (12). By the
              uniqueness part of Theorem 7.1.2, this solution is identical to φ(t), and hence
              φ(t) = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cn x(n) (t), as was to be proved.
Theorem 7.4.3 If x(1) , . . . , x(n) are solutions of Eq. (3) on the interval α < t < β, then in this interval
              W[x(1) , . . . , x(n) ] either is identically zero or else never vanishes.
                 The significance of Theorem 7.4.3 lies in the fact that it relieves us of the necessity
              of examining W[x(1) , . . . , x(n) ] at all points in the interval of interest and enables us
              to determine whether x(1) , . . . , x(n) form a fundamental set of solutions merely by
              evaluating their Wronskian at any convenient point in the interval.
                 Theorem 7.4.3 is proved by first establishing that the Wronskian of x(1) , . . . , x(n)
              satisfies the differential equation (see Problem 2)
                                             dW
                                                    = [p11 (t) + p22 (t) + · · · + pnn (t)]W.              (14)
                                              dt
              Hence                                                                            
                                            W(t) = c exp          [p11 (t) + · · · + pnn (t)] dt ,         (15)
              where c is an arbitrary constant, and the conclusion of the theorem follows imme-
              diately. The expression for W(t) in Eq. (15) is known as Abel’s formula; note the
              similarity of this result to Theorem 3.2.7 and especially to Eq. (23) of Section 3.2.
                 Alternatively, Theorem 7.4.3 can be established by showing that if n solu-
              tions x(1) , . . . , x(n) of Eq. (3) are linearly dependent at one point t = t0 , then they
              must be linearly dependent at each point in α < t < β (see Problem 8). Conse-
              quently, if x(1) , . . . , x(n) are linearly independent at one point, they must be linearly
              independent at each point in the interval.
                 The next theorem states that the system (3) always has at least one fundamental
              set of solutions.
Theorem 7.4.4 Let
                                              ⎛ ⎞                  ⎛ ⎞                          ⎛ ⎞
                                                1                    0                            0
                                              ⎜ 0⎟                 ⎜ 1⎟                         ⎜ 0⎟
                                              ⎜ ⎟                  ⎜ ⎟                          ⎜ .⎟
                                              ⎜ ⎟                  ⎜ ⎟                          ⎜ ⎟
                                       e(1) = ⎜ 0⎟ ,      e(2) = ⎜ 0⎟ ,       ...,     e(n) = ⎜ .. ⎟ ;
                                              ⎜ .. ⎟               ⎜ .. ⎟                       ⎜ ⎟
                                              ⎝ .⎠                 ⎝ .⎠                         ⎝ 0⎠
                                                0                    0                            1
              further, let x(1) , . . . , x(n) be the solutions of the system (3) that satisfy the initial
              conditions
                                              x(1) (t0 ) = e(1) ,   ...,    x(n) (t0 ) = e(n) ,           (16)
              respectively, where t0 is any point in α < t < β. Then x(1) , . . . , x(n) form a funda-
              mental set of solutions of the system (3).
                 To prove this theorem, note that the existence and uniqueness of the solutions
              x(1) , . . . , x(n) mentioned in Theorem 7.4.4 are ensured by Theorem 7.1.2. It is not
              hard to see that the Wronskian of these solutions is equal to 1 when t = t0 ; therefore
              x(1) , . . . , x(n) are a fundamental set of solutions.
                  Once one fundamental set of solutions has been found, other sets can be gener-
              ated by forming (independent) linear combinations of the first set. For theoretical
              purposes, the set given by Theorem 7.4.4 is usually the simplest.
                  Finally, it may happen (just as for second order linear equations) that a system
              whose coefficients are all real may give rise to solutions that are complex-valued.
              In this case, the following theorem is analogous to Theorem 3.2.6 and enables us to
              obtain real-valued solutions instead.
Theorem 7.4.5 Consider the system (3)
                                                          x = P(t)x,
              where each element of P is a real-valued continuous function. If x = u(t) + iv(t) is
              a complex-valued solution of Eq. (3), then its real part u(t) and its imaginary part
              v(t) are also solutions of this equation.
                 To prove this result, we substitute u(t) + iv(t) for x in Eq. (3), thereby obtaining
                                    x − P(t)x = u (t) − P(t)u(t) + i [v (t) − P(t)v(t)] = 0.          (17)
              We have used the assumption that P(t) is real-valued to separate Eq. (17) into
              its real and imaginary parts. Since a complex number is zero if and only if its
              real and imaginary parts are both zero, we conclude that u (t) − P(t)u(t) = 0 and
              v (t) − P(t)v(t) = 0. Therefore, u(t) and v(t) are solutions of Eq. (3).
                 To summarize the results of this section:
              1. Any set of n linearly independent solutions of the system x = P(t)x constitutes a
                    fundamental set of solutions.
              2. Under the conditions given in this section, such fundamental sets always exist.
              3. Every solution of the system x = P(t)x can be represented as a linear combination of any
                    fundamental set of solutions.
PROBLEMS        1. Prove the generalization of Theorem 7.4.1, as expressed in the sentence that includes
                    Eq. (8), for an arbitrary value of the integer k.
                2. In this problem we outline a proof of Theorem 7.4.3 in the case n = 2. Let x(1) and x(2)
                    be solutions of Eq. (3) for α < t < β, and let W be the Wronskian of x(1) and x(2) .
                    (a) Show that
                                                     (1)                                 
                                                     dx
                                                     1        dx1(2)   x1(1)    x1(2) 
                                             dW                                          
                                                 =  dt         dt  +                    
                                                                         dx(1)        (2)  .
                                              dt     (1)                2        dx  2 
                                                     x         x2   dt
                                                                 (2)                        
                                                        2                             dt
    (b) Using Eq. (3), show that
                                                dW
                                                      = (p11 + p22 )W.
                                                  dt
    (c) Find W(t) by solving the differential equation obtained in part (b). Use this expression
    to obtain the conclusion stated in Theorem 7.4.3.
    (d) Prove Theorem 7.4.3 for an arbitrary value of n by generalizing the procedure of parts
    (a), (b), and (c).
 3. Show that the Wronskians of two fundamental sets of solutions of the system (3) can differ
    at most by a multiplicative constant.
    Hint: Use Eq. (15).
 4. If x1 = y and x2 = y , then the second order equation
                                               y + p(t)y + q(t)y = 0                                   (i)
    corresponds to the system
                                               x1 = x2 ,
                                               x2 = −q(t)x1 − p(t)x2 .                                  (ii)
    Show that if x(1) and x(2) are a fundamental set of solutions of Eqs. (ii), and if y(1) and y(2)
    are a fundamental set of solutions of Eq. (i), then W[y(1) , y(2) ] = cW[x(1) , x(2) ], where c is a
    nonzero constant.
    Hint: y(1) (t) and y(2) (t) must be linear combinations of x11 (t) and x12 (t).
 5. Show that the general solution of x = P(t)x + g(t) is the sum of any particular solution x(p)
    of this equation and the general solution x(c) of the corresponding homogeneous equation.
                                                               2
                                   (1)       t          (2)       t
 6. Consider the vectors x (t) =                  and x (t) =         .
                                             1                    2t
    (a) Compute the Wronskian of x(1) and x(2) .
    (b) In what intervals are x(1) and x(2) linearly independent?
    (c) What conclusion can be drawn about the coefficients in the system of homogeneous
    differential equations satisfied by x(1) and x(2) ?
    (d) Find this system of equations and verify the conclusions of part (c).
                                           2                     t
                                   (1)       t            (2)       e
 7. Consider the vectors x (t) =                   and x (t) = t , and answer the same questions as
                                             2t                     e
    in Problem 6.
The following two problems indicate an alternative derivation of Theorem 7.4.2.
 8. Let x(1) , . . . , x(m) be solutions of x = P(t)x on the interval α < t < β. Assume that P is
    continuous, and let t0 be an arbitrary point in the given interval. Show that x(1) , . . . , x(m)
    are linearly dependent for α < t < β if (and only if) x(1) (t0 ), . . . , x(m) (t0 ) are linearly depen-
    dent. In other words x(1) , . . . , x(m) are linearly dependent on the interval (α, β) if they are
    linearly dependent at any point in it.
    Hint: There are constants c1 , . . . , cm that satisfy c1 x(1) (t0 ) + · · · + cm x(m) (t0 ) = 0. Let
    z(t) = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cm x(m) (t), and use the uniqueness theorem to show that z(t) = 0
    for each t in α < t < β.
 9. Let x(1) , . . . , x(n) be linearly independent solutions of x = P(t)x, where P is continuous on
    α < t < β.
                  (a) Show that any solution x = z(t) can be written in the form
                                                        z(t) = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cn x(n) (t)
                  for suitable constants c1 , . . . , cn .
                  Hint: Use the result of Problem 12 of Section 7.3, and also Problem 8 above.
                  (b) Show that the expression for the solution z(t) in part (a) is unique; that is, if
                  z(t) = k1 x(1) (t) + · · · + kn x(n) (t), then k1 = c1 , . . . , kn = cn .
                  Hint: Show that (k1 − c1 )x(1) (t) + · · · + (kn − cn )x(n) (t) = 0 for each t in α < t < β, and use
                  the linear independence of x(1) , . . . , x(n) .
7.5 Homogeneous Linear Systems with Constant Coefficients
             We will concentrate most of our attention on systems of homogeneous linear
             equations with constant coefficients—that is, systems of the form
                                                                 x = Ax,                                          (1)
             where A is a constant n × n matrix. Unless stated otherwise, we will assume further
             that all the elements of A are real (rather than complex) numbers.
                If n = 1, then the system reduces to a single first order equation
                                                                 dx
                                                                       = ax,                                       (2)
                                                                  dt
             whose solution is x = ceat . Note that x = 0 is the only equilibrium solution if a = 0.
             If a < 0, then other solutions approach x = 0 as t increases, and in this case we say
             that x = 0 is an asymptotically stable equilibrium solution. On the other hand, if
             a > 0, then x = 0 is unstable, since other solutions depart from it with increasing t.
             For systems of n equations, the situation is similar but more complicated. Equilibrium
             solutions are found by solving Ax = 0. We usually assume that det A  = 0, so x = 0
             is the only equilibrium solution. An important question is whether other solutions
             approach this equilibrium solution or depart from it as t increases; in other words, is
             x = 0 asymptotically stable or unstable? Or are there still other possibilities?
                The case n = 2 is particularly important and lends itself to visualization in the
             x1 x2 -plane, called the phase plane. By evaluating Ax at a large number of points
             and plotting the resulting vectors, we obtain a direction field of tangent vectors to
             solutions of the system of differential equations. A qualitative understanding of the
             behavior of solutions can usually be gained from a direction field. More precise
             information results from including in the plot some solution curves, or trajectories.
             A plot that shows a representative sample of trajectories for a given system is called
             a phase portrait. A well-constructed phase portrait provides easily understood infor-
             mation about all solutions of a two-dimensional system in a single graphical display.
             Although creating quantitatively accurate phase portraits requires computer assis-
             tance, it is usually possible to sketch qualitatively accurate phase portraits by hand,
             as we demonstrate in Examples 2 and 3 below.
           Our first task, however, is to show how to find solutions of systems such as Eq. (1).
        We start with a particularly simple example.
        Find the general solution of the system
EXAMPLE                                                                
                                                             2        0
   1                                                  
                                                    x =
                                                             0    −3
                                                                          x.                        (3)
           The most important feature of this system is that the coefficient matrix is a diagonal matrix.
        Thus, by writing the system in scalar form, we obtain
                                              x1 = 2x1 ,         x2 = −3x2 .
        Each of these equations involves only one of the unknown variables, so we can solve the two
        equations separately. In this way we find that
                                             x1 = c1 e2t ,         x2 = c2 e−3t ,
        where c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants. Then, by writing the solution in vector form, we have
                                                                                    
                               c1 e2t           e2t              0               1 2t       0 −3t
                       x=               = c1            + c2 −3t = c1               e + c2     e .  (4)
                              c2 e−3t            0             e                 0          1
        Now we define the two solutions x(1) and x(2) so that
                                                                               
                                       (1)         1 2t              (2)          0 −3t
                                      x (t) =           e ,        x (t) =           e ,            (5)
                                                   0                              1
        The Wronskian of these solutions is
                                                                             
                                              (1)   (2)
                                                                e2t
                                                                         0 
                                          W[x , x ](t) =                      = e−t ,             (6)
                                                                0       e−3t 
        which is never zero. Therefore, x(1) and x(2) form a fundamental set of solutions, and the
        general solution of Eq. (3) is given by Eq. (4).
           In Example 1 we found two independent solutions of the given system (3) in
        the form of an exponential function multiplied by a vector. This was perhaps to be
        expected since we have found other linear equations with constant coefficients to
        have exponential solutions, and the unknown x in the system (3) is a vector. So let us
        try to extend this idea to the general system (1) by seeking solutions of the form
                                                          x = ξert ,                                (7)
        where the exponent r and the vector ξ are to be determined. Substituting from Eq. (7)
        for x in the system (1) gives
                                                      rξert = Aξert .
        Upon canceling the nonzero scalar factor ert , we obtain Aξ = rξ, or
                                                     (A − rI)ξ = 0,                                 (8)
        where I is the n × n identity matrix. Thus, to solve the system of differential equa-
        tions (1), we must solve the system of algebraic equations (8). This latter problem is
        precisely the one that determines the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix A.
        Therefore, the vector x given by Eq. (7) is a solution of Eq. (1), provided that r is an
        eigenvalue and ξ an associated eigenvector of the coefficient matrix A.
           The following two examples are typical of 2 × 2 systems with eigenvalues that are
        real and different. In each example we will solve the system and construct a corre-
        sponding phase portrait. We will see that solutions have very distinct geometrical
        patterns depending on whether the eigenvalues have the same sign or different signs.
        Later in the section we return to a further discussion of the general n × n system.
        Consider the system
EXAMPLE                                                     
                                                      1    1
   2                                            
                                               x =
                                                      4    1
                                                               x.                                   (9)
        Plot a direction field and determine the qualitative behavior of solutions. Then find the general
        solution and draw a phase portrait showing several trajectories.
           A direction field for this system is shown in Figure 7.5.1. By following the arrows in this
        figure, you can see that a typical solution in the second quadrant eventually moves into the
        first or third quadrant, and likewise for a typical solution in the fourth quadrant. On the
        other hand, no solution leaves either the first or the third quadrant. Further, it appears that
        a typical solution departs from the neighborhood of the origin and ultimately has a slope of
        approximately 2.
                                                     x2
                                                      2
                                                      1
                                 –2         –1                    1          2       x1
                                                    –1
                                                    –2
                               FIGURE 7.5.1    Direction field for the system (9).
           To find solutions explicitly, we assume that x = ξert and substitute for x in Eq. (9). We are
        led to the system of algebraic equations
                                                          
                                           1−r      1      ξ1       0
                                                                =     .                            (10)
                                            4     1−r      ξ2       0
Equations (10) have a nontrivial solution if and only if the determinant of coefficients is zero.
Thus, allowable values of r are found from the equation
                                          
                         1 − r
                                      1 
                                           = (1 − r)2 − 4
                          4        1 − r
                                             = r 2 − 2r − 3 = (r − 3)(r + 1) = 0.                  (11)
Equation (11) has the roots r1 = 3 and r2 = −1; these are the eigenvalues of the coefficient
matrix in Eq. (9). If r = 3, then the system (10) reduces to the single equation
                                               −2ξ1 + ξ2 = 0.                                      (12)
Thus ξ2 = 2ξ1 , and the eigenvector corresponding to r1 = 3 can be taken as
                                                            
                                                              1
                                                  ξ (1) =         .                                (13)
                                                              2
Similarly, corresponding to r2 = −1, we find that ξ2 = −2ξ1 , so the eigenvector is
                                                          
                                                  (2)          1
                                                ξ =                 .                              (14)
                                                           −2
The corresponding solutions of the differential equation are
                                                                          
                                (1)          1 3t             (2)              1 −t
                              x (t) =           e ,          x (t) =             e .               (15)
                                             2                                −2
The Wronskian of these solutions is
                                                                          
                                                        e3t          e−t 
                                     (1)   (2)         
                              W[x , x ](t) =  3t                           = −4e2t ,             (16)
                                                       2e       −2e−t 
which is never zero. Hence the solutions x(1) and x(2) form a fundamental set, and the general
solution of the system (9) is
                                      x = c1 x(1) (t) + c2 x(2) (t)
                                                                
                                                 1 3t                  1 −t
                                         = c1         e + c2                 e ,                   (17)
                                                 2                  −2
where c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants.
    To visualize the solution (17), it is helpful to consider its graph in the x1 x2 -plane for various
values of the constants c1 and c2 . We start with x = c1 x(1) (t) or, in scalar form,
                                         x1 = c1 e3t ,       x2 = 2c1 e3t .
By eliminating t between these two equations, we see that this solution lies on the straight line
x2 = 2x1 ; see Figure 7.5.2a. This is the line through the origin in the direction of the eigenvector
ξ (1) . If we look on the solution as the trajectory of a moving particle, then the particle is in the
first quadrant when c1 > 0 and in the third quadrant when c1 < 0. In either case the particle
departs from the origin as t increases. Next consider x = c2 x(2) (t), or
                                      x1 = c2 e−t ,        x2 = −2c2 e−t .
    This solution lies on the line x2 = −2x1 , whose direction is determined by the eigenvector ξ (2) .
    The solution is in the fourth quadrant when c2 > 0 and in the second quadrant when c2 < 0, as
     shown in Figure 7.5.2a. In both cases the particle moves toward the origin as t increases. The
     solution (17) is a combination of x(1) (t) and x(2) (t). For large t the term c1 x(1) (t) is dominant
     and the term c2 x(2) (t) becomes negligible. Thus all solutions for which c1  = 0 are asymptotic to
     the line x2 = 2x1 as t → ∞. Similarly, all solutions for which c2  = 0 are asymptotic to the line
     x2 = −2x1 as t → −∞. A phase portrait for the system including the graphs of several solutions
     is shown in Figure 7.5.2a. The pattern of trajectories in this figure is typical of all 2 × 2 systems
     x = Ax for which the eigenvalues are real and of opposite signs. The origin is called a saddle
     point in this case. Saddle points are always unstable because almost all trajectories depart
     from them as t increases.
          x2                                     x1
              x(1)(t)
           2
                                                  2
           1
–2 –1                 1     2        x1                                 0.5                    1         t
          –1
             x(2)(t)
                                                –2
          –2
           (a)                                                               (b)
           FIGURE 7.5.2       (a) A phase portrait for the system (9); the origin is a saddle point.
                               (b) Typical plots of x1 versus t for the system (9).
         In the preceding paragraph, we have described how to draw by hand a qualitatively correct
     sketch of the trajectories of a system such as Eq. (9), once the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
     have been determined. However, to produce a detailed and accurate drawing, such as Figure
     7.5.2a and other figures that appear later in this chapter, a computer is extremely helpful, if
     not indispensable.
        As an alternative to Figure 7.5.2a, you can also plot x1 or x2 as a function of t; some typical
     plots of x1 versus t are shown in Figure 7.5.2b, and those of x2 versus t are similar. For certain
     initial conditions it follows that c1 = 0 in Eq. (17), so that x1 = c2 e−t and x1 → 0 as t → ∞. One
     such graph is shown in Figure 7.5.2b, corresponding to a trajectory that approaches the origin in
     Figure 7.5.2a. For most initial conditions, however, c1  = 0 and x1 is given by x1 = c1 e3t + c2 e−t .
    Then the presence of the positive exponential term causes x1 to grow exponentially in mag-
     nitude as t increases. Several graphs of this type are shown in Figure 7.5.2b, corresponding to
     trajectories that depart from the neighborhood of the origin in Figure 7.5.2a. It is important to
     understand the relation between parts (a) and (b) of Figure 7.5.2 and other similar figures that
     appear later, since you may want to visualize solutions either in the x1 x2 -plane or as functions
     of the independent variable t.
        Consider the system                                      √ 
EXAMPLE                                                   −3        2
                                                x = √                    x.                            (18)
   3                                                        2     −2
        Draw a direction field for this system and find its general solution. Then plot a phase portrait
        showing several typical trajectories in the phase plane.
           The direction field for the system (18) in Figure 7.5.3 shows clearly that all solutions approach
        the origin. To find the solutions, we assume that x = ξert ; then we obtain the algebraic system
                                                         √    
                                          −3 − r            2        ξ1        0
                                           √                              =        .                    (19)
                                              2        −2 − r        ξ2        0
        The eigenvalues satisfy
                                    (−3 − r)(−2 − r) − 2 = r 2 + 5r + 4
                                                               = (r + 1)(r + 4) = 0,                   (20)
        so r1 = −1 and r2 = −4. For r = −1, Eq. (19) becomes
                                                      √    
                                             −2           2     ξ1         0
                                             √                        =        .                        (21)
                                                2 −1            ξ2         0
                      √
        Hence ξ2 = 2 ξ1 , and the eigenvector ξ (1) corresponding to the eigenvalue r1 = −1 can be
        taken as                                               
                                                       (1)
                                                                 1
                                                    ξ = √ .                                            (22)
                                                                  2
                                                                                      √
         Similarly, corresponding to the eigenvalue r2 = −4 we have ξ1 = − 2 ξ2 , so the eigenvector is
                                                             √ 
                                                     (2)      − 2
                                                   ξ =                  .                               (23)
                                                                 1
        Thus a fundamental set of solutions of the system (18) is
                                                                           √ 
                                  (1)
                                             1        −t         (2)          − 2
                                x (t) =     √       e ,        x (t) =               e−4t ,            (24)
                                              2                                  1
                                                           x2
                                                            2
                                                            1
                                 –2          –1                             1          2    x1
                                                           –1
                                                           –2
                             FIGURE 7.5.3        Direction field for the system (18).
and the general solution is
                                                                           √ 
                                                           1                 − 2
                        x = c1 x(1) (t) + c2 x(2) = c1 √        e−t + c2            e−4t .               (25)
                                                            2                  1
    A phase portrait for the system (18) is constructed by drawing graphs of the solution (25)
                                                                                            (1)
for several values of c1 and c√       2 , as shown in Figure 7.5.4a. The solution x (t) approaches
                                                                    (2)
the origin along
              √      the line x 2 =      2 x 1 , and the solution x     (t) approaches   the origin along the
line x1 = − 2 x2 . The directions of these lines are determined by the eigenvectors ξ (1) and
ξ (2) , respectively. In general, we have a combination of these two fundamental solutions. As
t → ∞, the solution x(2) (t) is negligible compared to√x(1) (t). Thus, unless c1 = 0, the solution
(25) approaches the origin tangent to the line x2 = 2x1 . The pattern of trajectories shown
in Figure 7.5.4a is typical of all 2 × 2 systems x = Ax for which the eigenvalues are real,
different, and of the same sign. The origin is called a node for such a system. If the eigenvalues
were positive rather than negative, then the trajectories would be similar but traversed in
the outward direction. Nodes are asymptotically stable if the eigenvalues are negative and
unstable if the eigenvalues are positive.
                   x2                                       x1
                             x(1)(t)
                    2
                                                             1
                    1
   –2       –1                1         2         x1                                                        t
                                                                                 0.5                 1
                   –1
                                       x(2)(t)
                                                            –1
                   –2
                     (a)                                                          (b)
    FIGURE 7.5.4 (a) A phase portrait for the system (18); the origin is an asynptotically
                   stable node. (b) Typical plots of x1 versus t for the system (18).
    Although Figure 7.5.4a was computer-generated, a qualitatively correct sketch of the tra-
jectories can be drawn quickly by hand on the basis of a knowledge of the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors.
    Some typical plots of x1 versus t are shown in Figure 7.5.4b. Observe that each of the
graphs approaches the t-axis asymptotically as t increases, corresponding to a trajectory that
approaches the origin in Figure 7.5.2a. The behavior of x2 as a function of t is similar.
    Examples 2 and 3 illustrate the two main cases for 2 × 2 systems having eigenvalues
that are real and different. The eigenvalues have either opposite signs (Example 2)
or the same sign (Example 3). The other possibility is that zero is an eigenvalue,
but in this case it follows that det A = 0, which violates the assumption made at the
beginning of this section. However, see Problems 7 and 8.
           Returning to the general system (1), we proceed as in the examples. To find solu-
        tions of the differential equation (1), we must find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
        of A from the associated algebraic system (8). The eigenvalues r1 , . . . , rn (which need
        not all be different) are roots of the nth degree polynomial equation
                                                         det(A − rI) = 0.                                    (26)
        The nature of the eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors determines the
        nature of the general solution of the system (1). If we assume that A is a real-valued
        matrix, then we must consider the following possibilities for the eigenvalues of A:
        1. All eigenvalues are real and different from each other.
        2. Some eigenvalues occur in complex conjugate pairs.
        3. Some eigenvalues, either real or complex, are repeated.
           If the n eigenvalues are all real and different, as in the three preceding examples,
        then associated with each eigenvalue ri is a real eigenvector ξ (i) , and the n eigen-
        vectors ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (n) are linearly independent. The corresponding solutions of the
        differential system (1) are
                                      x(1) (t) = ξ (1) er1 t , . . . , x(n) (t) = ξ (n) ern t .              (27)
        To show that these solutions form a fundamental set, we evaluate their Wronskian:
                                                                 (1) r t                          
                                                                ξ 1 e 1
                                                                                · · · ξ (n)
                                                                                         1 e 
                                                                                              rn t 
                                                                 .                         .. 
                                 W[x(1) , . . . , x(n) ](t) =  ..                           . 
                                                                
                                                                ξ (1) er1 t · · · ξ (n) ern t 
                                                                    n                    n
                                                                                  (1)                   
                                                                                 ξ 1
                                                                                        ···       ξ (n)
                                                                                                     1 
                                                                                                         
                                                                  (r1 +···+rn )t  ..                .. 
                                                            =e                    .                  .  . (28)
                                                                                 
                                                                                 ξ (1)  ···       ξ (n) 
                                                                                     n               n
        First, we observe that the exponential function is never zero. Next, since the eigen-
        vectors ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (n) are linearly independent, the determinant in the last term of
        Eq. (28) is nonzero. As a consequence, the Wronskian W[x(1) , . . . , x(n) ](t) is never
        zero; hence x(1) , . . . , x(n) form a fundamental set of solutions. Thus the general
        solution of Eq. (1) is
                                              x = c1 ξ (1) er1 t + · · · + cn ξ (n) ern t .                  (29)
           If A is real and symmetric (a special case of Hermitian matrices), recall from Sec-
        tion 7.3 that all the eigenvalues r1 , . . . , rn must be real. Further, even if some of the
        eigenvalues are repeated, there is always a full set of n eigenvectors ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (n) that
        are linearly independent (in fact, orthogonal). Hence the corresponding solutions of
        the differential system (1) given by Eq. (27) again form a fundamental set of solutions,
        and the general solution is again given by Eq. (29). The following example illustrates
        this case.
        Find the general solution of
                                                           ⎛                      ⎞
EXAMPLE                                                       0        1        1
                                                           ⎜                      ⎟
   4                                                   
                                                     x = ⎝1            0        1⎠ x.                        (30)
                                                              1        1        0
   Observe that the coefficient matrix is real and symmetric. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors
of this matrix were found in Example 5 of Section 7.3:
                                                                     ⎛ ⎞
                                                                      1
                                                                     ⎜ ⎟
                                              r1 = 2,        ξ (1) = ⎝1⎠ ;                       (31)
                                                                      1
                                                                  ⎛    ⎞              ⎛    ⎞
                                                                     1                   0
                                                                  ⎜ ⎟                 ⎜ ⎟
                   r2 = −1,              r3 = −1;        ξ (2) = ⎝ 0⎠ ,       ξ (3) = ⎝ 1⎠ .     (32)
                                                                    −1                  −1
Hence a fundamental set of solutions of Eq. (30) is
                            ⎛ ⎞                            ⎛ ⎞                        ⎛    ⎞
                                1                               1                        0
                            ⎜ ⎟                            ⎜ ⎟                        ⎜ ⎟
                x(1) (t) = ⎝1⎠ e2t ,           x(2) (t) = ⎝ 0⎠ e−t ,       x(3) (t) = ⎝ 1⎠ e−t , (33)
                                1                             −1                        −1
and the general solution is
                                          ⎛ ⎞            ⎛ ⎞              ⎛ ⎞
                                            1                  1             0
                                          ⎜ ⎟            ⎜ ⎟              ⎜ ⎟
                                x = c1 ⎝1⎠ e2t + c2 ⎝ 0⎠ e−t + c3 ⎝ 1⎠ e−t .                     (34)
                                            1               −1             −1
This example illustrates the fact that even though an eigenvalue (r = −1) has algebraic mul-
tiplicity 2, it may still be possible to find two linearly independent eigenvectors ξ (2) and ξ (3)
and, as a consequence, to construct the general solution (34).
   The behavior of the solution (34) depends critically on the initial conditions. For large t the
first term on the right side of Eq. (34) is the dominant one; therefore, if c1  = 0, all components
of x become unbounded as t → ∞. On the other hand, for certain initial points c1 will be zero.
In this case, the solution involves only the negative exponential terms, and x → 0 as t → ∞.
The initial points that cause c1 to be zero are precisely those that lie in the plane determined by
the eigenvectors ξ (2) and ξ (3) corresponding to the two negative eigenvalues. Thus solutions that
start in this plane approach the origin as t → ∞, while all other solutions become unbounded.
   If some of the eigenvalues occur in complex conjugate pairs, then there are still n
linearly independent solutions of the form (27), provided that all the eigenvalues are
different. Of course, the solutions arising from complex eigenvalues are complex-
valued. However, as in Section 3.3, it is possible to obtain a full set of real-valued
solutions. This is discussed in Section 7.6.
   More serious difficulties can occur if an eigenvalue is repeated. In this event the
number of corresponding linearly independent eigenvectors may be smaller than
the algebraic multiplicity of the eigenvalue. If so, the number of linearly independent
solutions of the form ξert will be smaller than n. To construct a fundamental set
of solutions, it is then necessary to seek additional solutions of another form. The
situation is somewhat analogous to that for an nth order linear equation with constant
coefficients; a repeated root of the characteristic equation gave rise to solutions of
the form ert , tert , t 2 ert , . . . . The case of repeated eigenvalues is treated in Section 7.8.
   Finally, if A is complex, then complex eigenvalues need not occur in conjugate
pairs, and the eigenvectors are normally complex-valued even though the associated
eigenvalue may be real. The solutions of the differential equation (1) are still of the
         form (27), provided that there are n linearly independent eigenvectors, but in general
         all the solutions are complex-valued.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6:
         (a) Find the general solution of the given system of equations and describe the behavior of
         the solution as t → ∞.
         (b) Draw a direction field and plot a few trajectories of the system.
                                                                         
               
                     3 −2                                      
                                                                     1 −2
          1. x =               x                          2. x =               x
                     2 −2                                            3 −4
                                                                         
               
                     2 −1                                      
                                                                     1     1
          3. x =               x                          4. x =               x
                     3 −2                                            4 −2
                                                                 5       3
                                                                              
               
                     −2      1                                      4      4
          5. x =                 x                        6. x = 3              x
                       1 −2                                                 5
                                                                     4      4
         In each of Problems 7 and 8:
         (a) Find the general solution of the given system of equations.
         (b) Draw a direction field and a few of the trajectories. In each of these problems, the coef-
         ficient matrix has a zero eigenvalue. As a result, the pattern of trajectories is different from
         those in the examples in the text.
                                                                            
               
                     4 −3                                      
                                                                       3     6
          7. x =               x                          8. x =                 x
                     8 −6                                            −1 −2
         In each of Problems 9 through 14, find the general solution of the given system of equations.
                                                                                
               
                       1     i                                 
                                                                       2     2+i
          9. x =                 x                       10. x =                     x
                     −i      1                                       −1 −1 − i
                   ⎛                 ⎞                             ⎛                 ⎞
                     1      1      2                                 3      2      4
                   ⎜                 ⎟                             ⎜                 ⎟
         11. x = ⎝1        2      1⎠ x                  12. x = ⎝2        0      2⎠ x
                     2      1      1                                 4      2      3
                   ⎛                 ⎞                             ⎛                ⎞
                        1     1     1                                1 −1         4
                   ⎜                 ⎟                             ⎜                ⎟
         13. x = ⎝ 2         1 −1⎠ x                    14. x = ⎝3       2 −1⎠ x
                     −8 −5 −3                                        2     1 −1
         In each of Problems 15 through 18, solve the given initial value problem. Describe the behavior
         of the solution as t → ∞.
                                                                                      
                     5 −1                    2                       −2      1                1
         15. x =              x, x(0) =                 16. x =                x, x(0) =
                     3     1               −1                        −5      4                3
                   ⎛                  ⎞          ⎛ ⎞               ⎛                  ⎞          ⎛ ⎞
                        1     1     2              2                   0      0 −1                  7
                   ⎜                  ⎟          ⎜ ⎟               ⎜                  ⎟          ⎜ ⎟
         17. x = ⎝ 0         2     2⎠ x, x(0) = ⎝0⎠ 18. x = ⎝ 2             0     0⎠ x, x(0) = ⎝5⎠
                     −1       1     3              1                 −1       2     4               5
         19. The system tx = Ax is analogous to the second order Euler equation (Section 5.4).
              Assuming that x = ξt r , where ξ is a constant vector, show that ξ and r must satisfy
              (A − rI)ξ = 0 in order to obtain nontrivial solutions of the given differential equation.
Referring to Problem 19, solve the given system of equations in each of Problems 20 through
23. Assume that t > 0.
                                                                               
            2 −1                                                           5 −1
20. tx =                 x                                   21. tx =              x
            3 −2                                                           3     1
                                                                                
            4 −3                                                           3 −2
22. tx =                 x                                   23. tx =              x
            8 −6                                                           2 −2
In each of Problems 24 through 27, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a matrix A are given.
Consider the corresponding system x = Ax.
(a) Sketch a phase portrait of the system.
(b) Sketch the trajectory passing through the initial point (2, 3).
(c) For the trajectory in part (b), sketch the graphs of x1 versus t and of x2 versus t on the
same set of axes.
                                                                  
                     (1)      −1                             (2)     1
24. r1 = −1, ξ =                       ;       r2 = −2, ξ =
                                 2                                   2
                                                                
                  (1)       −1                            (2)      1
25. r1 = 1, ξ =                    ;         r2 = −2, ξ =
                              2                                    2
                                                                
                              −1                                   1
26. r1 = −1, ξ (1) =                   ;       r2 = 2, ξ (2) =
                                 2                                 2
                                                           
                            1                                    1
27. r1 = 1, ξ (1) =             ;          r2 = 2, ξ (2) =
                            2                                  −2
28. Consider a 2 × 2 system x = Ax. If we assume that r1  = r2 , the general solution is
    x = c1 ξ (1) er1 t + c2 ξ (2) er2 t , provided that ξ (1) and ξ (2) are linearly independent. In this prob-
    lem we establish the linear independence of ξ (1) and ξ (2) by assuming that they are linearly
    dependent and then showing that this leads to a contradiction.
    (a) Note that ξ (1) satisfies the matrix equation (A − r1 I)ξ (1) = 0; similarly, note that
    (A − r2 I)ξ (2) = 0.
    (b) Show that (A − r2 I)ξ (1) = (r1 − r2 )ξ (1) .
    (c) Suppose that ξ (1) and ξ (2) are linearly dependent. Then c1 ξ (1) + c2 ξ (2) = 0 and at least
    one of c1 and c2 (say c1 ) is not zero. Show that (A − r2 I)(c1 ξ (1) + c2 ξ (2) ) = 0, and also show
    that (A − r2 I)(c1 ξ (1) + c2 ξ (2) ) = c1 (r1 − r2 )ξ (1) . Hence c1 = 0, which is a contradiction.
    Therefore, ξ (1) and ξ (2) are linearly independent.
    (d) Modify the argument of part (c) if we assume that c2  = 0.
    (e) Carry out a similar argument for the case in which the order n is equal to 3; note that
    the procedure can be extended to an arbitrary value of n.
29. Consider the equation
                                                    ay + by + cy = 0,                                       (i)
    where a, b, and c are constants with a  = 0. In Chapter 3 it was shown that the general
    solution depended on the roots of the characteristic equation
                                                     ar 2 + br + c = 0.                                       (ii)
    (a) Transform Eq. (i) into a system of first order equations                by letting x1 = y, x2 = y . Find
                                                                        x
    the system of equations x = Ax satisfied by x = 1 .
                                                                        x2
    (b) Find the equation that determines the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix A in
    part (a). Note that this equation is just the characteristic equation (ii) of Eq. (i).
30. The two-tank system of Problem 22 in Section 7.1 leads to the initial value problem
                                                                      
                               
                                     − 101      3
                                               40                    −17
                              x =                     x,     x(0) =        ,
                                        1
                                       10
                                              − 15                   −21
    where x1 and x2 are the deviations of the salt levels Q1 and Q2 from their respective
    equilibria.
    (a) Find the solution of the given initial value problem.
    (b) Plot x1 versus t and x2 versus t on the same set of axes.
    (c) Find the smallest time T such that |x1 (t)| ≤ 0.5 and |x2 (t)| ≤ 0.5 for all t ≥ T.
31. Consider the system
                                                             
                                                   −1     −1
                                           x =                  x.
                                                    −α     −1
    (a) Solve the system for α = 0.5. What are the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix?
    Classify the equilibrium point at the origin as to type.
    (b) Solve the system for α = 2. What are the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix? Classify
    the equilibrium point at the origin as to type.
    (c) In parts (a) and (b), solutions of the system exhibit two quite different types of behav-
    ior. Find the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix in terms of α, and determine the value
    of α between 0.5 and 2 where the transition from one type of behavior to the other occurs.
Electric Circuits. Problems 32 and 33 are concerned with the electric circuit described by the
system of differential equations in Problem 21 of Section 7.1:
                                            ⎛ R             1 ⎞ 
                                            −
                                                    1
                                                          −
                               d I          ⎜ L             L ⎟
                                        =⎝  ⎜                   ⎟ I .                          (i)
                               dt V               1         1 ⎠ V
                                                         −
                                                  C        CR2
32. (a) Find the general solution of Eq. (i) if R1 = 1 , R2 = 35 , L = 2 H, and C = 23 F.
    (b) Show that I(t) → 0 and V(t) → 0 as t → ∞, regardless of the initial values I(0) and
    V(0).
33. Consider the preceding system of differential equations (i).
    (a) Find a condition on R1 , R2 , C, and L that must be satisfied if the eigenvalues of the
    coefficient matrix are to be real and different.
    (b) If the condition found in part (a) is satisfied, show that both eigenvalues are negative.
    Then show that I(t) → 0 and V(t) → 0 as t → ∞, regardless of the initial conditions.
    (c) If the condition found in part (a) is not satisfied, then the eigenvalues are either
    complex or repeated. Do you think that I(t) → 0 and V(t) → 0 as t → ∞ in these cases
    as well?
    Hint: In part (c), one approach is to change the system (i) into a single second order
    equation. We also discuss complex and repeated eigenvalues in Sections 7.6 and 7.8.
7.6 Complex Eigenvalues
              In this section we consider again a system of n linear homogeneous equations with
              constant coefficients
                                                               x = Ax,                                 (1)
              where the coefficient matrix A is real-valued. If we seek solutions of the form x = ξert ,
              then it follows, as in Section 7.5, that r must be an eigenvalue and ξ a corresponding
              eigenvector of the coefficient matrix A. Recall that the eigenvalues r1 , . . . , rn of A
              are the roots of the characteristic equation
                                                         det(A − rI) = 0                                (2)
              and that the corresponding eigenvectors satisfy
                                                           (A − rI)ξ = 0.                               (3)
                 If A is real, then the coefficients in the polynomial equation (2) for r are real, and
              any complex eigenvalues must occur in conjugate pairs. For example, if r1 = λ + iμ,
              where λ and μ are real, is an eigenvalue of A, then so is r2 = λ − iμ. To explore the
              effect of complex eigenvalues, we begin with an example.
              Find a fundamental set of real-valued solutions of the system
   EXAMPLE                                                      1            
                                                         
                                                                 −2         1
      1                                                 x =
                                                                  −1 − 21
                                                                                x.                       (4)
              Plot a phase portrait and graphs of components of typical solutions.
                 A direction field for the system (4) is shown in Figure 7.6.1. This plot suggests that the
              trajectories in the phase plane spiral clockwise toward the origin.
                 To find a fundamental set of solutions, we assume that
                                                                x = ξert                                 (5)
              and obtain the set of linear algebraic equations
                                               1                                  
                                               −2 − r              1         ξ1       0
                                                                                  =                      (6)
                                                   −1         − 21 − r       ξ2       0
              for the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of A. The characteristic equation is
                                                                    
                                            − 1 − r           1 
                                             2
                                                                     = r 2 + r + 54 = 0;               (7)
                                             −1           − 21 − r 
              therefore the eigenvalues are r1 = − 21 + i and r2 = − 21 − i. From Eq. (6) a straightforward
              calculation shows that the corresponding eigenvectors are
                                                                               
                                                  (1)       1            (2)        1
                                               ξ =              ,       ξ =            .                 (8)
                                                            i                      −i
              Observe that the eigenvectors ξ (1) and ξ (2) are also complex conjugates. Hence a fundamental
              set of solutions of the system (4) is
                                                                                  
                                      (1)      1 (−1/2+i)t               (2)          1 (−1/2−i)t
                                     x (t) =          e         ,       x (t) =          e        .      (9)
                                                i                                    −i
                                                 x2
                                                  2
                                                  1
                          –2          –1                        1               2        x1
                                                 –1
                                                 –2
                       FIGURE 7.6.1 A direction field for the system (4).
    To obtain a set of real-valued solutions, we can (by Theorem 7.4.5) choose the real and
imaginary parts of either x(1) or x(2) . In fact,
                                                                                          
                 (1)      1 −t/2                            e−t/2 cos t            e−t/2 sin t
                x (t) =       e (cos t + i sin t) =                       + i −t/2               . (10)
                           i                             −e−t/2 sin t              e    cos t
Hence a set of real-valued solutions of (Eq. 4) is
                                                                               
                                  −t/2    cos t                    −t/2    sin t
                         u(t) = e                   ,    v(t) = e                    .             (11)
                                         − sin t                           cos t
To verify that u(t) and v(t) are linearly independent, we compute their Wronskian:
                                                                              
                                              e−t/2 cos t        e−t/2 sin t 
                                             
                              W(u, v)(t) =  −t/2                              
                                             −e      sin t      e−t/2 cos t 
                                          = e−t (cos2 t + sin2 t) = e−t .
The Wronskian W(u, v)(t) is never zero, so it follows that u(t) and v(t) constitute a fundamental
set of (real-valued) solutions of the system (4).
   The graphs of the solutions u(t) and v(t) are shown in Figure 7.6.2a. Since
                                                                 
                                             1                      0
                                   u(0) =         ,     v(0) =          ,
                                             0                      1
the graphs of u(t) and v(t) pass through the points (1, 0) and (0, 1), respectively. Other solutions
of the system (4) are linear combinations of u(t) and v(t), and graphs of a few of these solutions
are also shown in Figure 7.6.2a; this figure is a phase portrait for the system (4). Each trajectory
approaches the origin along a spiral path as t → ∞, making infinitely many circuits about the
origin; this is due to the fact that the solutions (11) are products of decaying exponential and
sine or cosine factors. Some typical graphs of x1 versus t are shown in Figure 7.6.2b; each one
represents a decaying oscillation in time.
                  x2                                         x1
     u(t)
                   2
                                                              1
                   1
 –2       –1                   1        2           x1                           2                  4        t
                  –1
                                                             –1
v(t)              –2
                    (a)                                                           (b)
                 FIGURE 7.6.2 (a) A phase portrait for the system (4); the origin is a spiral point.
                      (b) Plots of x1 versus t for the system (4); graphs of x2 versus t are similar.
              Figure 7.6.2a is typical of all 2 × 2 systems x = Ax whose eigenvalues are complex with
           negative real part. The origin is called a spiral point and is asymptotically stable because all
           trajectories approach it as t increases. For a system whose eigenvalues have a positive real
           part, the trajectories are similar to those in Figure 7.6.2a, but the direction of motion is away
           from the origin, and the trajectories become unbounded. In this case, the origin is unstable. If
           the real part of the eigenvalues is zero, then the trajectories neither approach the origin nor
           become unbounded but instead repeatedly traverse a closed curve about the origin. Examples
           of this behavior can be seen in Figures 7.6.3b and 7.6.4b below. In this case the origin is called
           a center and is said to be stable, but not asymptotically stable. In all three cases, the direction
           of motion may be either clockwise, as in this example, or counterclockwise, depending on the
           elements of the coefficient matrix A.
              The phase portrait in Figure 7.6.2a was drawn by a computer, but it is possible to produce
           a useful sketch of the phase portrait by hand. We have noted that when the eigenval-
           ues λ ± iμ are complex, then the trajectories either spiral in (λ < 0), spiral out (λ > 0), or
           repeatedly traverse a closed curve (λ = 0). To determine whether the direction of motion
           is clockwise or counterclockwise, we only need to determine the direction of motion at a
           single convenient point. For instance, in the system (4) we might choose x = (0, 1)T . Then
           Ax = (1, − 21 )T . Thus at the point (0, 1) in the phase plane the tangent vector x to the tra-
           jectory at that point has a positive x1 -component and therefore is directed from the second
           quadrant into the first. The direction of motion is therefore clockwise for the trajectories of
           this system.
              Returning to the general equation (1)
                                                         x = Ax,
           we can proceed just as in the example. Suppose that there is a pair of complex
           conjugate eigenvalues, r1 = λ + iμ and r2 = λ − iμ. Then the corresponding eigen-
           vectors ξ (1) and ξ (2) are also complex conjugates. To see that this is so, recall that
r1 and ξ (1) satisfy
                                        (A − r1 I)ξ (1) = 0.                               (12)
On taking the complex conjugate of this equation and noting that A and I are real-
valued, we obtain
                                        (A − r 1 I)ξ (1) = 0,                              (13)
where r 1 and ξ (1) are the complex conjugates of r1 and ξ (1) , respectively. In other
words, r2 = r 1 is also an eigenvalue, and ξ (2) = ξ (1) is a corresponding eigenvector.
The corresponding solutions
                           x(1) (t) = ξ (1) er1 t ,   x(2) (t) = ξ (1) er1 t               (14)
of the differential equation (1) are then complex conjugates of each other. Therefore,
as in Example 1, we can find two real-valued solutions of Eq. (1) corresponding to
the eigenvalues r1 and r2 by taking the real and imaginary parts of x(1) (t) or x(2) (t)
given by Eq. (14).
   Let us write ξ (1) = a + ib, where a and b are real; then we have
                           x(1) (t) = (a + ib)e(λ+iμ)t
                                     = (a + ib)eλt (cos μt + i sin μt).                    (15)
Upon separating x(1) (t) into its real and imaginary parts, we obtain
               x(1) (t) = eλt (a cos μt − b sin μt) + ieλt (a sin μt + b cos μt).          (16)
If we write x(1) (t) = u(t) + iv(t), then the vectors
                                u(t) = eλt (a cos μt − b sin μt),
                                                                                           (17)
                                 v(t) = eλt (a sin μt + b cos μt)
are real-valued solutions of Eq. (1). It is possible to show that u and v are linearly
independent solutions (see Problem 27).
   For example, suppose that the matrix A has two complex eigenvalues r1 = λ + iμ,
r2 = λ − iμ, and that r3 , . . . , rn are all real and distinct. Let the corresponding eigen-
vectors be ξ (1) = a + ib, ξ (2) = a − ib, ξ (3) , . . . , ξ (n) . Then the general solution of
Eq. (1) is
                      x = c1 u(t) + c2 v(t) + c3 ξ (3) er3 t + · · · + cn ξ (n) ern t ,    (18)
where u(t) and v(t) are given by Eqs. (17). We emphasize that this analysis applies
only if the coefficient matrix A in Eq. (1) is real, for it is only then that complex
eigenvalues and eigenvectors must occur in conjugate pairs.
   For 2 × 2 systems with real coefficients, we have now completed our description
of the three main cases that can occur.
1. Eigenvalues are real and have opposite signs; x = 0 is a saddle point.
2. Eigenvalues are real and have the same sign but are unequal; x = 0 is a node.
3. Eigenvalues are complex with nonzero real part; x = 0 is a spiral point.
           Other possibilities are of less importance and occur as transitions between two
        of the cases just listed. For example, a zero eigenvalue occurs during the transition
        between a saddle point and a node. Purely imaginary eigenvalues occur during a
        transition between asymptotically stable and unstable spiral points. Finally, real and
        equal eigenvalues appear during the transition between nodes and spiral points.
        The system                                                
EXAMPLE
                                                         α      2
                                                 x =                 x                                 (19)
   2                                                     −2      0
        contains a parameter α. Describe how the solutions depend qualitatively on α; in particular,
        find the critical values of α at which the qualitative behavior of the trajectories in the phase
        plane changes markedly.
           The behavior of the trajectories is controlled by the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix.
        The characteristic equation is
                                                  r 2 − αr + 4 = 0,                                    (20)
        so the eigenvalues are                            √
                                                      α±    α2 − 16
                                                 r=                   .                                (21)
                                                            2
        From Eq. (21) it follows that the eigenvalues are complex conjugates for −4 < α < 4 and are
        real otherwise. Thus two critical values are α = −4 and α = 4, where the eigenvalues change
        from real to complex, or vice versa. For α < −4 both eigenvalues are negative, so all trajecto-
        ries approach the origin, which is an asymptotically stable node. For α > 4 both eigenvalues
        are positive, so the origin is again a node, this time unstable; all trajectories (except x = 0)
        become unbounded. In the intermediate range, −4 < α < 4, the eigenvalues are complex and
        the trajectories are spirals. However, for −4 < α < 0 the real part of the eigenvalues is
        negative, the spirals are directed inward, and the origin is asymptotically stable, whereas for
        0 < α < 4 the real part of the eigenvalues is positive and the origin is unstable. Thus α = 0 is
        also a critical value where the direction of the spirals changes from inward to outward. For
        this value of α, the origin is a center and the trajectories are closed curves about the origin,
        corresponding to solutions that are periodic in time. The other critical values, α = ±4, yield
        eigenvalues that are real and equal. In this case the origin is again a node, but the phase portrait
        differs somewhat from those in Section 7.5. We take up this case in Section 7.8.
        A Multiple Spring–Mass System. Consider the system of two masses and three springs
        shown in Figure 7.1.1, whose equations of motion are given by Eqs. (1) in Section
        7.1. If we assume that there are no external forces, then F1 (t) = 0, F2 (t) = 0, and the
        resulting equations are
                                           d2 x1
                                       m1         = −(k1 + k2 )x1 + k2 x2 ,
                                            dt 2
                                                                                                       (22)
                                           d2 x2
                                       m2 2 = k2 x1 − (k2 + k3 )x2 .
                                            dt
        These equations can be solved as a system of two second order equations (see
        Problem 29), but, as is consistent with our approach in this chapter, we will transform
        them into a system of four first order equations. Let y1 = x1 , y2 = x2 , y3 = x1 , and
        y4 = x2 . Then
                                              y1 = y3 ,      y2 = y4 ,                               (23)
        and, from Eqs. (22),
                       m1 y3 = −(k1 + k2 )y1 + k2 y2 ,                m2 y4 = k2 y1 − (k2 + k3 )y2 .          (24)
        The following example deals with a particular case of this two-mass, three-spring
        system.
        Suppose that m1 = 2, m2 = 9/4, k1 = 1, k2 = 3, and k3 = 15/4 in Eqs. (23) and (24) so that
EXAMPLE these equations become
   3                     y1 = y3 ,        y2 = y4 ,      y3 = −2y1 + 23 y2 ,       y4 = 43 y1 − 3y2 .       (25)
        Analyze the possible motions described by Eqs. (25), and draw graphs showing typical
        behavior.
          We can write the system (25) in matrix form as
                                                  ⎛                           ⎞
                                                      0      0     1        0
                                                  ⎜                           ⎟
                                                  ⎜ 0        0     0        1⎟
                                           y = ⎜                             ⎟ y = Ay.                         (26)
                                                  ⎜−2
                                                  ⎝
                                                             3
                                                             2
                                                                   0        0⎟⎠
                                                      4
                                                      3
                                                          −3       0        0
        Keep in mind that y1 and y2 are the positions of the two masses, relative to their equilibrium
        positions, and that y3 and y4 are their velocities. We assume, as usual, that y = ξert , where r must
        be an eigenvalue of the matrix A and ξ a corresponding eigenvector. It is possible, though a bit
        tedious, to find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of A by hand, but it is easy with appropriate
        computer software. The characteristic polynomial of A is
                                               r 4 + 5r 2 + 4 = (r 2 + 1)(r 2 + 4),                             (27)
        so the eigenvalues are r1 = i, r2 = −i, r3 = 2i, and r4 = −2i. The corresponding eigenvectors
        are
                            ⎛ ⎞                     ⎛      ⎞                 ⎛      ⎞               ⎛        ⎞
                              3                          3                        3                        3
                            ⎜ 2⎟                    ⎜ 2⎟                     ⎜ −4⎟                  ⎜ −4⎟
                            ⎜ ⎟                     ⎜      ⎟                 ⎜      ⎟               ⎜        ⎟
                   ξ (1) = ⎜ ⎟ ,           ξ (2) = ⎜       ⎟,       ξ (3) = ⎜       ⎟,      ξ (4) = ⎜        ⎟. (28)
                            ⎝3i⎠                    ⎝−3i⎠                    ⎝ 6i⎠                  ⎝−6i⎠
                             2i                       −2i                      −8i                        8i
        The complex-valued solutions ξ (1) eit and ξ (2) e−it are complex conjugates, so two real-valued
        solutions can be found by finding the real and imaginary parts of either of them. For instance,
        we have
                                             ⎛ ⎞
                                                3
                                             ⎜ 2⎟
                                             ⎜ ⎟
                                ξ (1) eit = ⎜ ⎟ (cos t + i sin t)
                                             ⎝3i⎠
                                               2i
                                             ⎛           ⎞     ⎛          ⎞
                                                 3 cos t         3 sin t
                                             ⎜ 2 cos t ⎟       ⎜ 2 sin t ⎟
                                             ⎜           ⎟     ⎜          ⎟
                                          =⎜             ⎟+i⎜             ⎟ = u(1) (t) + iv(1) (t).             (29)
                                             ⎝−3 sin t ⎠       ⎝3 cos t ⎠
                                               −2 sin t          2 cos t
In a similar way, we obtain
                                    ⎛      ⎞
                                         3
                                    ⎜ −4⎟
                                    ⎜      ⎟
                       ξ (3) e2it = ⎜      ⎟ (cos 2t + i sin 2t)
                                    ⎝ 6i⎠
                                       −8i
                                    ⎛             ⎞      ⎛           ⎞
                                        3 cos 2t            3 sin 2t
                                    ⎜−4 cos 2t ⎟         ⎜ −4 sin 2t ⎟
                                    ⎜             ⎟      ⎜           ⎟
                                  =⎜              ⎟+i⎜               ⎟ = u(2) (t) + iv(2) (t).      (30)
                                    ⎝ −6 sin 2t ⎠        ⎝ 6 cos 2t ⎠
                                         8 sin 2t         −8 cos 2t
We leave it to you to verify that u(1) , v(1) , u(2) , and v(2) are linearly independent and therefore
form a fundamental set of solutions. Thus the general solution of Eq. (26) is
                        ⎛             ⎞      ⎛          ⎞      ⎛            ⎞      ⎛             ⎞
                              3 cos t           3 sin t            3 cos 2t             3 sin 2t
                        ⎜ 2 cos t ⎟          ⎜ 2 sin t ⎟       ⎜−4 cos 2t ⎟        ⎜ −4 sin 2t ⎟
                        ⎜             ⎟      ⎜          ⎟      ⎜            ⎟      ⎜             ⎟
              y = c1 ⎜                ⎟ + c2 ⎜          ⎟ + c3 ⎜            ⎟ + c4 ⎜             ⎟, (31)
                        ⎝−3 sin t ⎠          ⎝3 cos t ⎠        ⎝ −6 sin 2t ⎠       ⎝ 6 cos 2t ⎠
                           −2 sin t             2 cos t            8 sin 2t          −8 cos 2t
where c1 , c2 , c3 , and c4 are arbitrary constants.
   The phase space for this system is four-dimensional, and each solution, obtained by a par-
ticular set of values for c1 , . . . , c4 in Eq. (31), corresponds to a trajectory in this space. Since
each solution, given by Eq. (31), is periodic with period 2π, each trajectory is a closed curve.
No matter where the trajectory starts at t = 0, it returns to that point at t = 2π, t = 4π, and
so forth, repeatedly traversing the same curve in each time interval of length 2π. We do not
attempt to show any of these four-dimensional trajectories here. Instead, in the figures below
we show projections of certain trajectories in the y1 y3 - or y2 y4 -plane, thereby showing the
motion of each mass separately.
   The first two terms on the right side of Eq. (31) describe motions with frequency 1 and period
2π. Note that y2 = (2/3)y1 in these terms and that y4 = (2/3)y3 . This means that the two masses
move back and forth together, always going in the same direction, but with the second mass
moving only two-thirds as far as the first mass. If we focus on the solution u(1) (t) and plot y1
versus t and y2 versus t on the same axes, we obtain the cosine graphs of amplitude 3 and 2,
respectively, shown in Figure 7.6.3a. The trajectory of the first mass in the y1 y3 -plane lies on
the circle of radius 3 shown in Figure 7.6.3b, traversed clockwise starting at the point (3, 0)
and completing a circuit in time 2π. Also shown in this figure is the trajectory of the second
mass in the y2 y4 -plane, which lies on the circle of radius 2, also traversed clockwise starting at
(2, 0) and also completing a circuit in time 2π. The origin is a center in the respective y1 y3 - and
y2 y4 -planes. Similar graphs (with an appropriate shift in time) are obtained from v(1) or from
a linear combination of u(1) and v(1) .
   The remaining terms on the right side of Eq. (31) describe motions with frequency 2 and
period π. Observe that in this case, y2 = −(4/3)y1 and y4 = −(4/3)y3 . This means that the two
masses are always moving in opposite directions and that the second mass moves four-thirds
as far as the first mass. If we look only at u(2) (t) and plot y1 versus t and y2 versus t on the
same axes, we obtain Figure 7.6.4a. There is a phase difference of π, and the amplitude of y2
is four-thirds that of y1 , confirming the preceding statements about the motions of the masses.
Figure 7.6.4b shows a superposition of the trajectories for the two masses in their respective
         phase planes. Both graphs are ellipses, the inner one corresponding to the first mass and the
         outer one to the second. The trajectory on the inner ellipse starts at (3, 0), and the trajectory
         on the outer ellipse starts at (−4, 0). Both are traversed clockwise, and a circuit is completed
         in time π. The origin is a center in the respective y1 y3 - and y2 y4 -planes. Once again, similar
         graphs are obtained from v(2) or from a linear combination of u(2) and v(2) .
 y                                                                               y3(y4)           y22 + y42 = 4
 3    y1                                                                              3
                                                                                                        y12 + y32 = 9
 2    y2                                                                              2
 1                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                 y1(y2)
         5              10                15                t     –3    –2     –1                1      2      3
–1                                                                                   –1
–2                                                                                   –2
–3                                                                                   –3
                     (a)                                                                   (b)
                    FIGURE 7.6.3 (a) A plot of y1 versus t and y2 versus t for the solution
                           u(1) (t). (b) Superposition of projections of trajectories in the
                                      y1 y3 - and y2 y4 -planes for the solution u(1) (t).
  y                                                                           y3(y4)
  4        y2
                                                                                   8             4y12 + y32 = 36
      y1
                                                                                   6
                                                                                                      4y22 + y42 = 64
  2                                                                                4
                                                                                   2
    2         4       6          8          10        12      t      –4     –2                 2      4          y1( y2)
                                                                                 –2
 –2                                                                              –4
                                                                                 –6
 –4                                                                              –8
                       (a)                                                                  (b)
                    FIGURE 7.6.4 (a) A plot of y1 versus t and y2 versus t for the solution
                           u(2) (t). (b) Superposition of projections of trajectories in the
                                      y1 y3 - and y2 y4 -planes for the solution u(2) (t).
            The types of motion described in the two preceding paragraphs are called fundamental
         modes of vibration for the two-mass system. Each of them results from fairly special initial
         conditions. For example, to obtain the fundamental mode of frequency 1, both of the con-
         stants c3 and c4 in Eq. (31) must be zero. This occurs only for initial conditions in which
3y2 (0) = 2y1 (0) and 3y4 (0) = 2y3 (0). Similarly, the mode of frequency 2 is obtained only when
both of the constants c1 and c2 in Eq. (31) are zero—that is, when the initial conditions are
such that 3y2 (0) = −4y1 (0) and 3y4 (0) = −4y3 (0).
   For more general initial conditions the solution is a combination of the two fundamental
modes. A plot of y1 versus t for a typical case is shown in Figure 7.6.5a, and the projection
of the corresponding trajectory in the y1 y3 -plane is shown in Figure 7.6.5b. Observe that this
latter figure may be a bit misleading in that it shows the projection of the trajectory crossing
itself. This cannot be the case for the actual trajectory in four dimensions, because it would
violate the general uniqueness theorem: there cannot be two different solutions issuing from
the same initial point.
                       y1
                        4
                        2
                                        5            10             15               t
                       –2
                       –4
                                                  (a)
                                                  y3
                                                  4
                                                  2
                                 –4        –2                 2        4            y1
                                                 –2
                                                 –4
                                                 –6
                                                    (b)
                    FIGURE 7.6.5 A solution of the system (25) satisfying the
              initial condition y(0) = (−1, 4, 1, 1)T . (a) A plot of y1 versus t. (b) The
             projection of the trajectory in the y1 y3 -plane. As stated in the text, the
                    actual trajectory in four dimensions does not intersect itself.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6:
         (a) Express the general solution of the given system of equations in terms of real-valued
         functions.
         (b) Also draw a direction field, sketch a few of the trajectories, and describe the behavior of
         the solutions as t → ∞.
                                                                            
                 
                      3 −2                                     
                                                                     −1 −4
           1. x =              x                           2. x =                x
                      4 −1                                             1 −1
                                                                          
                 
                      2 −5                                     
                                                                     2 − 25
           3. x =              x                           4. x = 9            x
                      1 −2                                           5
                                                                         −1
                                                                            
                 
                      1 −1                                     
                                                                       1     2
           5. x =              x                           6. x =                x
                      5 −3                                           −5 −1
         In each of Problems 7 and 8, express the general solution of the given system of equations in
         terms of real-valued functions.
                    ⎛               ⎞                              ⎛                  ⎞
                      1     0     0                                  −3      0      2
                    ⎜               ⎟                              ⎜                  ⎟
           7. x = ⎝2       1 −2⎠ x                        8. x = ⎝ 1 −1           0⎠ x
                      3     2     1                                  −2 −1          0
         In each of Problems 9 and 10, find the solution of the given initial value problem. Describe the
         behavior of the solution as t → ∞.
                                                                                          
                 
                      1 −5                    1                
                                                                     −3      2                   1
           9. x =              x,     x(0) =             10. x =                 x,     x(0) =
                      1 −3                    1                      −1 −1                      −2
         In each of Problems 11 and 12:
         (a) Find the eigenvalues of the given system.
         (b) Choose an initial point (other than the origin) and draw the corresponding trajectory in
         the x1 x2 -plane.
         (c) For your trajectory in part (b), draw the graphs of x1 versus t and of x2 versus t.
         (d) For your trajectory in part (b), draw the corresponding graph in three-dimensional
         tx1 x2 -space.
                    3                                             4       
                     4
                           −2                                  
                                                                     −5 2
         11. x =                x                        12. x =               x
                      1 − 54                                         −1 65
         In each of Problems 13 through 20, the coefficient matrix contains a parameter α. In each of
         these problems:
         (a) Determine the eigenvalues in terms of α.
         (b) Find the critical value or values of α where the qualitative nature of the phase portrait for
         the system changes.
         (c) Draw a phase portrait for a value of α slightly below, and for another value slightly above,
         each critical value.
                                                                         
                 
                        α 1                                    
                                                                     0 −5
         13. x =                x                        14. x =               x
                      −1 α                                           1    α
                                                                 5      3
                                                                             
                 
                      2 −5                                          4     4
         15. x =                x                        16. x =               x
                      α −2                                           α     5
                                                                           4
                                                                        
      
             −1     α                                   
                                                                  3      α
17. x =                 x                          18. x =                   x
             −1    −1                                           −6 −4
                                                                      
              α    10                                           4     α
19. x =                x                               
                                                   20. x =                 x
             −1    −4                                           8 −6
In each of Problems 21 and 22, solve the given system of equations by the method of Problem
19 of Section 7.5. Assume that t > 0.
                                                                      
        
              −1 −1                                       
                                                                 2 −5
21. tx =                 x                         22. tx =                 x
               2 −1                                              1 −2
In each of Problems 23 and 24:
(a) Find the eigenvalues of the given system.
(b) Choose an initial point (other than the origin) and draw the corresponding trajectory in
the x1 x2 -plane. Also draw the trajectories in the x1 x3 - and x2 x3 -planes.
(c) For the initial point in part (b), draw the corresponding trajectory in x1 x2 x3 -space.
           ⎛ 1               ⎞                                ⎛ 1                 ⎞
             −4      1     0                                    −4         1   0
           ⎜                 ⎟                                ⎜                   ⎟
23. x = ⎝−1 − 41          0⎠ x                    24. x = ⎝−1 − 41           0 ⎠x
               0     0 − 14                                       0        0    1
                                                                               10
25. Consider the electric circuit shown in Figure 7.6.6. Suppose that R1 = R2 = 4 ,
    C = 21 F, and L = 8 H.
    (a) Show that this circuit is described by the system of differential equations
                                           1                
                                     d I           − 2 − 18        I
                                              =                        ,                         (i)
                                    dt V             2 − 21       V
    where I is the current through the inductor and V is the voltage drop across the capacitor.
    Hint: See Problem 20 of Section 7.1.
    (b) Find the general solution of Eqs. (i) in terms of real-valued functions.
    (c) Find I(t) and V(t) if I(0) = 2 A and V(0) = 3 V.
    (d) Determine the limiting values of I(t) and V(t) as t → ∞. Do these limiting values
    depend on the initial conditions?
                                                     R1
                                                     C
                                                             L
                                        R2
                           FIGURE 7.6.6 The circuit in Problem 25.
26. The electric circuit shown in Figure 7.6.7 is described by the system of differential equations
                                              ⎛                 ⎞
                                                           1      
                                              ⎜    0            ⎟ I
                                  d I                        L
                                           =⎜ ⎝ 1
                                                                ⎟         ,                      (i)
                                  dt V                       1 ⎠ V
                                                −       −
                                                   C        RC
    where I is the current through the inductor and V is the voltage drop across the capacitor.
    These differential equations were derived in Problem 19 of Section 7.1.
    (a) Show that the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix are real and different if L > 4R2 C;
    show that they are complex conjugates if L < 4R2 C.
    (b) Suppose that R = 1  , C = 21 F, and L = 1 H. Find the general solution of the
    system (i) in this case.
    (c) Find I(t) and V(t) if I(0) = 2 A and V(0) = 1 V.
    (d) For the circuit of part (b) determine the limiting values of I(t) and V(t) as t → ∞. Do
    these limiting values depend on the initial conditions?
                                                    C
                                                    R
                                                     L
                              FIGURE 7.6.7 The circuit in Problem 26.
27. In this problem we indicate how to show that u(t) and v(t), as given by Eqs. (17), are
    linearly independent. Let r1 = λ + iμ and r 1 = λ − iμ be a pair of conjugate eigenvalues of
    the coefficient matrix A of Eq. (1); let ξ (1) = a + ib and ξ (1) = a − ib be the corresponding
    eigenvectors. Recall that it was stated in Section 7.3 that two different eigenvalues have
    linearly independent eigenvectors, so if r1  = r 1 , then ξ (1) and ξ (1) are linearly independent.
    (a) First we show that a and b are linearly independent. Consider the equation
    c1 a + c2 b = 0. Express a and b in terms of ξ (1) and ξ (1) , and then show that
    (c1 − ic2 )ξ (1) + (c1 + ic2 )ξ (1) = 0.
    (b) Show that c1 − ic2 = 0 and c1 + ic2 = 0 and then that c1 = 0 and c2 = 0. Consequently,
    a and b are linearly independent.
    (c) To show that u(t) and v(t) are linearly independent, consider the equation
    c1 u(t0 ) + c2 v(t0 ) = 0, where t0 is an arbitrary point. Rewrite this equation in terms of a
    and b, and then proceed as in part (b) to show that c1 = 0 and c2 = 0. Hence u(t) and v(t)
    are linearly independent at the arbitrary point t0 . Therefore, they are linearly independent
    at every point and on every interval.
28. A mass m on a spring with constant k satisfies the differential equation (see Section 3.7)
                                                mu + ku = 0,
    where u(t) is the displacement at time t of the mass from its equilibrium position.
    (a) Let x1 = u, x2 = u , and show that the resulting system is
                                                              
                                                     0      1
                                             x =                 x.
                                                   −k/m 0
    (b) Find the eigenvalues of the matrix for the system in part (a).
    (c) Sketch several trajectories of the system. Choose one of your trajectories, and sketch
    the corresponding graphs of x1 versus t and x2 versus t. Sketch both graphs on one set of
    axes.
    (d) What is the relation between the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix and the natural
    frequency of the spring–mass system?
29. Consider the two-mass, three-spring system of Example 3 in the text. Instead of converting
    the problem into a system of four first order equations, we indicate here how to proceed
    directly from Eqs. (22).
    (a) Show that Eqs. (22) can be written in the form
                                                        
                                              −2       3
                                      x =            2
                                                           x = Ax.                                (i)
                                                 4
                                                 3
                                                     −3
    (b) Assume that x = ξ ert and show that
                                            (A − r 2 I)ξ = 0.
    Note that r 2 (rather than r) is an eigenvalue of A corresponding to an eigenvector ξ.
    (c) Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of A.
    (d) Write down expressions for x1 and x2 . There should be four arbitrary constants in
    these expressions.
    (e) By differentiating the results from part (d), write down expressions for x1 and x2 . Your
    results from parts (d) and (e) should agree with Eq. (31) in the text.
30. Consider the two-mass, three-spring system whose equations of motion are Eqs. (22) in
    the text. Let m1 = 1, m2 = 4/3, k1 = 1, k2 = 3, and k3 = 4/3.
    (a) As in the text, convert the system to four first order equations of the form y = Ay.
    Determine the coefficient matrix A.
    (b) Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of A.
    (c) Write down the general solution of the system.
    (d) Describe the fundamental modes of vibration. For each fundamental mode draw
    graphs of y1 versus t and y2 versus t. Also draw the corresponding trajectories in the y1 y3 -
    and y2 y4 -planes.
    (e) Consider the initial conditions y(0) = (2, 1, 0, 0)T . Evaluate the arbitrary constants in
    the general solution in part (c). What is the period of the motion in this case? Plot graphs
    of y1 versus t and y2 versus t. Also plot the corresponding trajectories in the y1 y3 - and
    y2 y4 -planes. Be sure you understand how the trajectories are traversed for a full period.
    (f) Consider other initial conditions of your own choice, and plot graphs similar to those
    requested in part (e).
31. Consider the two-mass, three-spring system whose equations of motion are Eqs. (22) in
    the text. Let m1 = m2 = 1 and k1 = k2 = k3 = 1.
    (a) As in the text, convert the system to four first order equations of the form y = Ay.
    Determine the coefficient matrix A.
    (b) Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of A.
    (c) Write down the general solution of the system.
    (d) Describe the fundamental modes of vibration. For each fundamental mode draw
    graphs of y1 versus t and y2 versus t. Also draw the corresponding trajectories in the y1 y3 -
    and y2 y4 -planes.
    (e) Consider the initial conditions y(0) = (−1, 3, 0, 0)T . Evaluate the arbitrary constants
    in the general solution in part (c). Plot y1 versus t and y2 versus t. Do you think the solution
    is periodic? Also draw the trajectories in the y1 y3 - and y2 y4 -planes.
    (f) Consider other initial conditions of your own choice, and plot graphs similar to those
    requested in part (e).
7.7 Fundamental Matrices
             The structure of the solutions of systems of linear differential equations can be
              further illuminated by introducing the idea of a fundamental matrix. Suppose that
              x(1) (t), . . . , x(n) (t) form a fundamental set of solutions for the equation
                                                                 x = P(t)x                             (1)
              on some interval α < t < β. Then the matrix
                                                           ⎛ (1)                              ⎞
                                                              x1 (t) · · ·          x1(n) (t)
                                                           ⎜ ..                         .. ⎟
                                                 (t) = ⎝ .                              . ⎠,           (2)
                                                              xn(1) (t)    ···      xn(n) (t)
              whose columns are the vectors x(1) (t), . . . , x(n) (t), is said to be a fundamental matrix
              for the system (1). Note that a fundamental matrix is nonsingular since its columns
              are linearly independent vectors.
              Find a fundamental matrix for the system
   EXAMPLE                                                                   
                                                                       1    1
      1                                                       
                                                             x =
                                                                       4    1
                                                                                 x.                      (3)
                 In Example 2 of Section 7.5, we found that
                                                                                               
                                                             e3t                              e−t
                                               x(1) (t) =           ,      x(2) (t) =
                                                           2e3t                            −2e−t
              are linearly independent solutions of Eq. (3). Thus a fundamental matrix for the system (3) is
                                                                                    
                                                                       e3t       e−t
                                                         (t) =                          .               (4)
                                                                      2e3t −2e−t
                 The solution of an initial value problem can be written very compactly in terms of
              a fundamental matrix. The general solution of Eq. (1) is
                                                     x = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cn x(n) (t)              (5)
              or, in terms of (t),
                                                                 x = (t)c,                             (6)
              where c is a constant vector with arbitrary components c1 , . . . , cn . For an initial value
              problem consisting of the differential equation (1) and the initial condition
                                                                 x(t0 ) = x0 ,                          (7)
              where t0 is a given point in α < t < β and x0 is a given initial vector, it is only necessary
              to choose the vector c in Eq. (6) so as to satisfy the initial condition (7). Hence c must
              satisfy
                                                               (t0 )c = x0 .                           (8)
Therefore, since (t0 ) is nonsingular,
                                      c = −1 (t0 )x0                                     (9)
and
                                    x = (t)−1 (t0 )x0                                  (10)
is the solution of the initial value problem (1), (7). We emphasize, however, that to
solve a given initial value problem,we would ordinarily solve Eq. (8) by row reduction
and then substitute for c in Eq. (6), rather than compute −1 (t0 ) and use Eq. (10).
   Recall that each column of the fundamental matrix  is a solution of Eq. (1). It
follows that  satisfies the matrix differential equation
                                         = P(t).                                      (11)
This relation is readily confirmed by comparing the two sides of Eq. (11) column by
column.
   Sometimes it is convenient to make use of the special fundamental matrix, denoted
by (t), whose columns are the vectors x(1) (t), . . . , x(n) (t) designated in Theorem 7.4.4.
Besides the differential equation (1), these vectors satisfy the initial conditions
                                       x(j) (t0 ) = e(j) ,                               (12)
where e(j) is the unit vector, defined in Theorem 7.4.4, with a one in the jth position
and zeros elsewhere. Thus (t) has the property that
                                      ⎛                       ⎞
                                        1      0   ···     0
                                      ⎜0       1   ···     0⎟
                                      ⎜                       ⎟
                             (t0 ) = ⎜ .      ..          .. ⎟ = I.                     (13)
                                      ⎝ ..      .           .⎠
                                        0      0   ···     1
We will always reserve the symbol  to denote the fundamental matrix satisfying the
initial condition (13) and use  when an arbitrary fundamental matrix is intended.
In terms of (t), the solution of the initial value problem (1), (7) is even simpler in
appearance; since −1 (t0 ) = I, it follows from Eq. (10) that
                                        x = (t)x0 .                                     (14)
Although the fundamental matrix (t) is often more complicated than (t), it is
especially helpful if the same system of differential equations is to be solved repeat-
edly subject to many different initial conditions. This corresponds to a given physical
system that can be started from many different initial states. If the fundamental
matrix (t) has been determined, then the solution for each set of initial condi-
tions can be found simply by matrix multiplication, as indicated by Eq. (14). The
matrix (t) thus represents a transformation of the initial conditions x0 into the solu-
tion x(t) at an arbitrary time t. Comparing Eqs. (10) and (14) makes it clear that
(t) = (t)−1 (t0 ).
        For the system (3)                                          
EXAMPLE                                                     1      1
                                                     
                                                   x =                 x
   2                                                        4      1
        in Example 1, find the fundamental matrix  such that (0) = I.
           The columns of  are solutions of Eq. (3) that satisfy the initial conditions
                                                                            
                                                       1                        0
                                        x(1) (0) =        ,     x(2) (0) =          .               (15)
                                                       0                        1
        Since the general solution of Eq. (3) is
                                                                  
                                                       1 3t             1 −t
                                            x = c1        e + c2            e ,
                                                       2              −2
        we can find the solution satisfying the first set of these initial conditions by choosing
        c1 = c2 = 21 ; similarly, we obtain the solution satisfying the second set of initial conditions
        by choosing c1 = 41 and c2 = − 14 . Hence
                                               ⎛                                    ⎞
                                                   e + 21 e−t
                                                 1 3t
                                                 2                   4
                                                                       e − 14 e−t
                                                                     1 3t
                                      (t) = ⎝                                      ⎠.              (16)
                                                   e3t − e−t         1 3t
                                                                     2
                                                                       e  +    1 −t
                                                                               2
                                                                                 e
        Note that the elements of (t) are more complicated than those of the fundamental matrix
        (t) given by Eq. (4); however, it is now easy to determine the solution corresponding to any
        set of initial conditions.
        The Matrix exp(At). Recall that the solution of the scalar initial value problem
                                              x = ax,         x(0) = x0 ,                         (17)
        where a is a constant, is
                                                    x = x0 exp(at).                                (18)
        Now consider the corresponding initial value problem for an n × n system, namely,
                                              x = Ax,         x(0) = x0 ,                         (19)
        where A is a constant matrix. Applying the results of this section to the problem (19),
        we can write its solution as
                                                       x = (t)x0 ,                                (20)
        where (0) = I. Comparing the problems (17) and (19), and their solutions, sug-
        gests that the matrix (t) might have an exponential character. We now explore this
        possibility.
           The scalar exponential function exp(at) can be represented by the power series
                                                                 ∞
                                                                       an t n
                                              exp(at) = 1 +                   ,                    (21)
                                                                         n!
                                                                 n=1
        which converges for all t. Let us now replace the scalar a by the n × n constant matrix
        A and consider the corresponding series
                                  ∞
                                      An t n                  A2 t 2               An t n
                             I+               = I + At +              + ··· +             + ···.   (22)
                                       n!                      2!                   n!
                                  n=1
Each term in the series (22) is an n × n matrix. It is possible to show that each element
of this matrix sum converges for all t as n → ∞. Thus the series (22) defines as its
sum a new matrix, which we denote by exp(At); that is,
                                                  ∞
                                                     An t n
                                 exp(At) = I +              ,                          (23)
                                                       n!
                                                 n=1
analogous to the expansion (21) of the scalar function exp(at).
   By differentiating the series (23) term by term, we obtain
                              ∞                        ∞
                                                                 
             d                   An t n−1               An t n
               [exp(At)] =                 =A I+                   = A exp(At).        (24)
            dt                   (n − 1)!                    n!
                             n=1                      n=1
Therefore, exp(At) satisfies the differential equation
                                 d
                                    exp(At) = A exp(At).                               (25)
                                 dt
Further, by setting t = 0 in Eq. (23) we find that exp(At) satisfies the initial condition
                                              
                                              
                                      exp(At) = I.                                    (26)
                                               t=0
The fundamental matrix  satisfies the same initial value problem as exp(At), namely,
                                  = A,        (0) = I.                             (27)
Then, by the uniqueness part of Theorem 7.1.2 (extended to matrix differential equa-
tions), we conclude that exp(At) and the fundamental matrix (t) are the same. Thus
we can write the solution of the initial value problem (19) in the form
                                       x = exp(At)x0 ,                                 (28)
which is analogous to the solution (18) of the initial value problem (17).
   In order to justify more conclusively the use of exp(At) for the sum of the series (22),
we should demonstrate that this matrix function does indeed have the properties we
associate with the exponential function. One way to do this is outlined in Problem 15.
Diagonalizable Matrices. The basic reason why a system of linear (algebraic or differ-
ential) equations presents some difficulty is that the equations are usually coupled.
In other words, some or all of the equations involve more than one—typically all—of
the unknown variables. Hence the equations in the system must be solved simultane-
ously. In contrast, if each equation involves only a single variable, then each equation
can be solved independently of all the others, which is a much easier task. This obser-
vation suggests that one way to solve a system of equations might be by transforming
it into an equivalent uncoupled system in which each equation contains only one
unknown variable. This corresponds to transforming the coefficient matrix A into a
diagonal matrix.
   Eigenvectors are useful in accomplishing such a transformation. Suppose that the
n × n matrix A has a full set of n linearly independent eigenvectors. Recall that this
will certainly be the case if the eigenvalues of A are all different, or if A is Hermitian.
        Letting ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (n) denote these eigenvectors and λ1 , . . . , λn the corresponding
        eigenvalues, form the matrix T whose columns are the eigenvectors—that is,
                                                    ⎛ (1)                           ⎞
                                                        ξ1          · · · ξ1(n)
                                                    ⎜ .                          .. ⎟
                                               T = ⎝ ..                           . ⎠.                 (29)
                                                        ξn(1)       ···       ξn(n)
        Since the columns of T are linearly independent vectors, det T  = 0; hence T is non-
        singular and T−1 exists. A straightforward calculation shows that the columns of the
        matrix AT are just the vectors Aξ (1) , . . . , Aξ (n) . Since Aξ (k) = λk ξ (k) , it follows that
                                                 ⎛ (1)                              ⎞
                                                  λ1 ξ1       · · · λn ξ1(n)
                                                 ⎜ .                         .. ⎟
                                         AT = ⎝ ..                            . ⎠ = TD,                (30)
                                                  λ1 ξn(1)    · · · λn ξn(n)
        where                                       ⎛                                  ⎞
                                                        λ1      0        ···        0
                                                    ⎜0         λ2        ···        0⎟
                                                    ⎜                                  ⎟
                                              D = ⎜ ..           ..                 .. ⎟               (31)
                                                    ⎝.            .                  .⎠
                                                         0      0        · · · λn
        is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are the eigenvalues of A. From Eq. (30)
        it follows that
                                                      T−1AT = D.                                       (32)
        Thus, if the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of A are known, A can be transformed
        into a diagonal matrix by the process shown in Eq. (32). This process is known as a
        similarity transformation, and Eq. (32) is summed up in words by saying that A is
        similar to the diagonal matrix D. Alternatively, we may say that A is diagonalizable.
        Observe that a similarity transformation leaves the eigenvalues of A unchanged and
        transforms its eigenvectors into the coordinate vectors e(1) , . . . , e(n) .
            If A is Hermitian, then the determination of T−1 is very simple. The eigenvectors
        ξ , . . . , ξ (n) of A are known to be mutually orthogonal, so let us choose them so
          (1)
        that they are also normalized by (ξ (i) , ξ (i) ) = 1 for each i. Then it is easy to verify that
        T−1 = T∗ ; in other words, the inverse of T is the same as its adjoint (the transpose of
        its complex conjugate).
            Finally, we note that if A has fewer than n linearly independent eigenvectors, then
        there is no matrix T such that T−1AT = D. In this case, A is not similar to a diagonal
        matrix and is not diagonalizable.
        Consider the matrix                                                
EXAMPLE                                                        1          1
                                                     A=                        .                        (33)
   3                                                           4          1
        Find the similarity transformation matrix T and show that A can be diagonalized.
            In Example 2 of Section 7.5, we found that the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of A are
                                                                                          
                                             (1)     1                                 (2)   1
                                    r1 = 3, ξ =           ;         r2 = −1, ξ =               .        (34)
                                                     2                                      −2
Thus the transformation matrix T and its inverse T−1 are
                                                                1          1
                                                                                
                                   1        1              −1
                            T=                   ;       T = 21               4
                                                                                   .        (35)
                                   2 −2                              2
                                                                           − 14
Consequently, you can check that
                                                              
                                     −1               3      0
                                    T AT =                        = D.                      (36)
                                                      0    −1
  Now let us turn again to the system
                                                x = Ax,                                    (37)
where A is a constant matrix. In Sections 7.5 and 7.6, we described how to solve
such a system by starting from the assumption that x = ξert . Now we provide another
viewpoint, one based on diagonalizing the coefficient matrix A.
  According to the results stated just above,it is possible to diagonalize A whenever A
has a full set of n linearly independent eigenvectors. Let ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (n) be eigenvectors
of A corresponding to the eigenvalues r1 , . . . , rn and form the transformation matrix
T whose columns are ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (n) . Then, defining a new dependent variable y by the
relation
                                                  x = Ty,                                   (38)
we have from Eq. (37) that
                                              Ty = ATy.                                    (39)
                    −1
Multiplying by T , we then obtain
                                           y = (T−1AT)y,                                   (40)
or, using Eq. (32),
                                                y = Dy.                                    (41)
Recall that D is the diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues r1 , . . . , rn of A along the
diagonal. A fundamental matrix for the system (41) is the diagonal matrix (see
Problem 16)
                                                   ⎛ r1 t                            ⎞
                                                       e       0 ... 0
                                                   ⎜ 0 er2 t . . . 0 ⎟
                                                   ⎜                                 ⎟
                        Q(t) = exp(Dt) = ⎜ ..                  ..                .. ⎟ .     (42)
                                                   ⎝ .          .                 . ⎠
                                                        0      0 · · · ern t
A fundamental matrix  for the system (37) is then found from Q by the transfor-
mation (38)
                                                 = TQ;                                     (43)
that is,
                                        ⎛ (1) r1 t                            ⎞
                                           ξ1 e           ···     ξ1(n) ern t
                                        ⎜ ..                           .. ⎟
                              (t) = ⎝ .                                . ⎠.                (44)
                                           ξn(1) er1 t    ···     ξn(n) ern t
            The columns of (t) are the same as the solutions in Eq. (27) of Section 7.5. Thus
         the diagonalization procedure does not offer any computational advantage over the
         method of Section 7.5, since in either case it is necessary to calculate the eigenvalues
         and eigenvectors of the coefficient matrix in the system of differential equations.
         Consider again the system of differential equations
 EXAMPLE
                                                       x = Ax,                                     (45)
    4
         where A is given by Eq. (33). Using the transformation x = Ty, where T is given by Eq. (35),
         you can reduce the system (45) to the diagonal system
                                                              
                                                    3       0
                                             y =                 y = Dy.                            (46)
                                                     0 −1
         Obtain a fundamental matrix for the system (46), and then transform it to obtain a fundamen-
         tal matrix for the original system (45).
            By multiplying D repeatedly with itself, we find that
                                                                             
                                           9    0                  27         0
                                   D2 =             , D3 =                        , ....            (47)
                                           0    1                    0 −1
         Therefore, it follows from Eq. (23) that exp(Dt) is a diagonal matrix with the entries e3t and
         e−t on the diagonal; that is,
                                                                      
                                                Dt       e3t         0
                                               e =                       .                          (48)
                                                          0       e−t
         Finally, we obtain the required fundamental matrix (t) by multiplying T and exp(Dt):
                                                                                       
                                         1    1     e3t         0            e3t        e−t
                                (t) =                               =                        .     (49)
                                         2 −2         0       e−t          2e3t −2e−t
         Observe that this fundamental matrix is the same as the one found in Example 1.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 10:
         (a) Find a fundamental matrix for the given system of equations.
         (b) Also find the fundamental matrix (t) satisfying (0) = I.
                                                                       3             
              
                     3 −2                                          
                                                                           −4        1
                                                                                     2
          1. x =               x                             2. x =                       x
                     2 −2                                                     1
                                                                              8
                                                                                   − 43
                                                                                 
              
                     2 −1                                          
                                                                           1       1
          3. x =               x                             4. x =                     x
                     3 −2                                                  4 −2
                                                                                    
              
                     2 −5                                          
                                                                           −1 −4
          5. x =               x                             6. x =                       x
                     1 −2                                                     1 −1
                                                                                 
              
                     5 −1                                          
                                                                           1 −1
          7. x =               x                             8. x =                     x
                     3     1                                               5 −3
          ⎛                ⎞                                 ⎛                  ⎞
              1     1     1                                    1     −1       4
          ⎜                ⎟                                 ⎜                  ⎟
 9. x = ⎝ 2        1   −1⎠ x                     10. x = ⎝3           2   −1 ⎠ x
            −8    −5    −3                                     2        1   −1
11. Solve the initial value problem
                                                                       
                                       2    −1                         2
                                 x =              x,       x(0) =
                                        3    −2                       −1
    by using the fundamental matrix (t) found in Problem 3.
12. Solve the initial value problem
                                                                     
                                       −1    −4                        3
                                 x =                 x,      x(0) =
                                           1  −1                        1
    by using the fundamental matrix (t) found in Problem 6.
13. Show that (t) = (t)−1 (t0 ), where (t) and (t) are as defined in this section.
14. The fundamental matrix (t) for the system (3) was found in Example 2. Show that
    (t)(s) = (t + s) by multiplying (t) and (s).
15. Let (t) denote the fundamental matrix satisfying  = A, (0) = I. In the text we also
    denoted this matrix by exp(At). In this problem we show that  does indeed have the
    principal algebraic properties associated with the exponential function.
    (a) Show that (t)(s) = (t + s); that is, show that exp(At) exp(As) = exp[A(t + s)].
    Hint: Show that if s is fixed and t is variable, then both (t)(s) and (t + s) satisfy the
    initial value problem Z = AZ, Z(0) = (s).
    (b) Show that (t)(−t) = I; that is, exp(At) exp[A(−t)] = I. Then show that
    (−t) = −1 (t).
    (c) Show that (t − s) = (t)−1 (s).
16. Show that if A is a diagonal matrix with diagonal elements a1 , a2 , . . . , an , then exp(At) is
    also a diagonal matrix with diagonal elements exp(a1 t), exp(a2 t), . . . , exp(an t).
17. Consider an oscillator satisfying the initial value problem
                             u + ω2 u = 0,      u(0) = u0 ,    u (0) = v0 .                    (i)
    (a) Let x1 = u, x2 = u , and transform Eqs. (i) into the form
                                        x = Ax,        x(0) = x0 .                              (ii)
    (b) By using the series (23), show that
                                                              sin ωt
                                    exp At = I cos ωt + A             .                         (iii)
                                                                ω
    (c) Find the solution of the initial value problem (ii).
18. The method of successive approximations (see Section 2.8) can also be applied to systems
    of equations. For example, consider the initial value problem
                                        x = Ax,        x(0) = x0 ,                               (i)
    where A is a constant matrix and x0 is a prescribed vector.
                    (a) Assuming that a solution x = φ(t) exists, show that it must satisfy the integral equation
                                                                                  t
                                                                   φ(t) = x0 +        Aφ(s) ds.                     (ii)
                                                                                  0
                    (b) Start with the initial approximation φ(0) (t) = x0 . Substitute this expression for φ(s) in
                    the right side of Eq. (ii) and obtain a new approximation φ(1) (t). Show that
                                                                     φ(1) (t) = (I + At)x0 .                       (iii)
                    (c) Repeat this process and thereby obtain a sequence of approximations φ , φ(1) ,         (0)
                    φ(2) , . . . , φ(n) , . . . . Use an inductive argument to show that
                                                                  
                                                                                   t2             tn
                                                       φ(n) (t) = I + At + A2 + · · · + An           x0 .          (iv)
                                                                                   2!             n!
                    (d) Let n → ∞ and show that the solution of the initial value problem (i) is
                                                                      φ(t) = exp(At)x0 .                            (v)
7.8 Repeated Eigenvalues
              We conclude our consideration of the linear homogeneous system with constant
               coefficients
                                                                          x = Ax                                  (1)
               with a discussion of the case in which the matrix A has a repeated eigenvalue. Recall
               that in Section 7.3 we stated that a repeated eigenvalue with algebraic multiplicity
               m ≥ 2 may have a geometric multiplicity less than m. In other words, there may be
               fewer than m linearly independent eigenvectors associated with this eigenvalue. The
               following example illustrates this possibility.
               Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix
   EXAMPLE                                                                           
                                                                             1 −1
      1                                                              A=
                                                                             1       3
                                                                                        .                           (2)
                  The eigenvalues r and eigenvectors ξ satisfy the equation (A − rI)ξ = 0, or
                                                                                 
                                                                1−r       −1      ξ1        0
                                                                                        =       .                   (3)
                                                                 1      3−r       ξ2        0
              The eigenvalues are the roots of the equation
                                                                             
                                                              1 − r
                                                                       −1 
                                         det(A − rI) =                        = r 2 − 4r + 4 = (r − 2)2 = 0.      (4)
                                                               1      3 − r
              Thus the two eigenvalues are r1 = 2 and r2 = 2; that is, the eigenvalue 2 has algebraic multi-
               plicity 2.
           To determine the eigenvectors, we must return to Eq. (3) and use for r the value 2. This gives
                                                                
                                                 −1 −1           ξ1        0
                                                                      =       .                        (5)
                                                    1        1   ξ2        0
        Hence we obtain the single condition ξ1 + ξ2 = 0, which determines ξ2 in terms of ξ1 , or vice
        versa. Thus the eigenvector corresponding to the eigenvalue r = 2 is
                                                                
                                                         (1)        1
                                                       ξ =            ,                                (6)
                                                                 −1
        or any nonzero multiple of this vector. Observe that there is only one linearly independent
        eigenvector associated with the double eigenvalue.
           Returning to the system (1), suppose that r = ρ is an m-fold root of the charac-
        teristic equation
                                                    det(A − rI) = 0.                                   (7)
        Then ρ is an eigenvalue of algebraic multiplicity m of the matrix A. In this event,
        there are two possibilities: either there are m linearly independent eigenvectors
        corresponding to the eigenvalue ρ, or else there are fewer than m such eigenvectors.
           In the first case, let ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (m) be m linearly independent eigenvectors associ-
        ated with the eigenvalue ρ of algebraic multiplicity m. Then there are m linearly
        independent solutions x(1) (t) = ξ (1) eρt , . . . , x(m) (t) = ξ (m) eρt of Eq. (1). Thus in this
        case it makes no difference that the eigenvalue r = ρ is repeated; there is still a fun-
        damental set of solutions of Eq. (1) of the form ξert . This case always occurs if the
        coefficient matrix A is Hermitian (or real and symmetric).
           However, if the coefficient matrix is not Hermitian, then there may be fewer than m
        independent eigenvectors corresponding to an eigenvalue ρ of algebraic multiplicity
        m, and if so, there will be fewer than m solutions of Eq. (1) of the form ξeρt associ-
        ated with this eigenvalue. Therefore, to construct the general solution of Eq. (1), it is
        necessary to find other solutions of a different form. Recall that a similar situation
        occurred in Section 3.4 for the linear equation ay + by + cy = 0 when the charac-
        teristic equation has a double root r. In that case we found one exponential solution
        y1 (t) = ert , but a second independent solution had the form y2 (t) = tert . With that
        result in mind, consider the following example.
        Find a fundamental set of solutions of                          
EXAMPLE                                                          1    −1
                                                 x = Ax =                  x                          (8)
   2                                                             1      3
        and draw a phase portrait for this system.
           A direction field for the system (8) is shown in Figure 7.8.1. From this figure it appears that
        all nonzero solutions depart from the origin.
           To solve the system, observe that the coefficient matrix A is the same as the matrix in Exam-
        ple 1. Thus we know that r = 2 is a double eigenvalue and that it has only a single corresponding
        eigenvector, which we may take as ξ T = (1, −1). Thus one solution of the system (8) is
                                                                
                                                                    1 2t
                                                    x(1) (t) =         e ,                             (9)
                                                                 −1
        but there is no second solution of the form x = ξert .
                                                 x2
                                                  2
                                                  1
                             –2          –1                    1     2     x1
                                                –1
                                                –2
                     FIGURE 7.8.1 A direction field for the system (8).
   Based on the procedure used for second order linear equations in Section 3.4, it may be
natural to attempt to find a second independent solution of the system (8) of the form
                                               x = ξte2t ,                                       (10)
where ξ is a constant vector to be determined. Substituting for x in Eq. (8), we obtain
                                    2ξte2t + ξe2t − Aξte2t = 0.                                  (11)
For Eq. (11) to be satisfied for all t, it is necessary for the coefficients of te2t and e2t both to be
zero. From the term in e2t we find that
                                                 ξ = 0.                                          (12)
Hence there is no nonzero solution of the system (8) of the form (10).
   Since Eq. (11) contains terms in both te2t and e2t , it appears that in addition to ξte2t , the
second solution must contain a term of the form ηe2t ; in other words, we need to assume that
                                            x = ξte2t + ηe2t ,                                   (13)
where ξ and η are constant vectors to be determined. Upon substituting this expression for x
in Eq. (8), we obtain
                             2ξte2t + (ξ + 2η)e2t = A(ξte2t + ηe2t ).                            (14)
Equating coefficients of te2t and e2t on each side of Eq. (14) gives the two conditions
                                             (A − 2I)ξ = 0                                       (15)
and
                                             (A − 2I)η = ξ                                       (16)
for the determination of ξ and η. Equation (15) is satisfied if ξ is an eigenvector of A
corresponding to the eigenvalue r = 2, such as ξ T = (1, −1). Since det(A − 2I) is zero,
Eq. (16) is solvable only if the right side ξ satisfies a certain condition. Fortunately, ξ and
its multiples are exactly the vectors that allow Eq. (16) to be solved. The augmented matrix for
Eq. (16) is
                                                              
                                             −1 −1            1
                                                                  .
                                                1      1 −1
The second row of this matrix is proportional to the first, so the system is solvable. We have
                                              −η1 − η2 = 1,
so if η1 = k, where k is arbitrary, then η2 = −k − 1. If we write
                                                                  
                                           k                0           1
                               η=                   =           +k         ,                   (17)
                                       −1 − k            −1            −1
then by substituting for ξ and η in Eq. (13), we obtain
                                                                   
                                       1               0 2t             1 2t
                             x=            te2t +           e +k           e .                 (18)
                                    −1               −1                −1
The last term in Eq. (18) is merely a multiple of the first solution x(1) (t) and may be ignored,
but the first two terms constitute a new solution:
                                                             
                                   (2)            1                 0 2t
                                  x (t) =              te +
                                                         2t
                                                                       e .                     (19)
                                                 −1             −1
   An elementary calculation shows that W[x(1) , x(2) ](t) = −e4t  = 0, and therefore x(1) and x(2)
form a fundamental set of solutions of the system (8). The general solution is
                         x = c1 x(1) (t) + c2 x(2) (t)
                                                                    
                                      1 2t                1               0 2t
                           = c1           e + c2              te +
                                                                2t
                                                                             e .               (20)
                                   −1                   −1              −1
   The main features of a phase portrait for the solution (20) follow from the presence of the
exponential factor e2t in every term. Therefore x → 0 as t → −∞ and, unless both c1 and c2 are
zero, x becomes unbounded as t → ∞. If c1 and c2 are not both zero, then along any trajectory
we have
                                   x2 (t)             −c1 − c2 t − c2
                             lim           = lim                        = −1.
                            t→−∞ x1 (t)       t→−∞        c1 + c2 t
Therefore, as t → −∞, every trajectory approaches the origin tangent to the line x2 = −x1
determined by the eigenvector; this behavior is clearly evident in Figure 7.8.2a. Further, as
t → ∞, the slope of each trajectory also approaches −1. However, it is possible to show that
trajectories do not approach asymptotes as t → ∞. Several trajectories of the system (8) are
shown in Figure 7.8.2a, and some typical plots of x1 versus t are shown in Figure 7.8.2b. The
pattern of trajectories in this figure is typical of 2 × 2 systems x = Ax with equal eigenvalues
and only one independent eigenvector. The origin is called an improper node in this case. If
the eigenvalues are negative, then the trajectories are similar but are traversed in the inward
direction. An improper node is asymptotically stable or unstable, depending on whether the
eigenvalues are negative or positive.
    x(1)(t)      x2                             x1
             x(2)(t)
                  2                              2
                  1                              1
        –2  –1          1    2      x1                           1             2         t
                –1
                                                –1
                –2
                                                –2
                   (a)                                               (b)
            FIGURE 7.8.2 (a) Phase portrait of the system (8); the origin is an
                   improper node. (b) Plots of x1 versus t for the system (8).
   One difference between a system of two first order equations and a single second
order equation is evident from the preceding example. For a second order linear
equation with a repeated root r1 of the characteristic equation, a term cer1 t in the sec-
ond solution is not required since it is a multiple of the first solution. On the other
hand, for a system of two first order equations, the term ηer1 t of Eq. (13) with r1 = 2
is not, in general, a multiple of the first solution ξer1 t , so the term ηer1 t must be
retained.
   Example 2 is entirely typical of the general case when there is a double eigenvalue
and a single associated eigenvector. Consider again the system (1), and suppose that
r = ρ is a double eigenvalue of A,but that there is only one corresponding eigenvector
ξ. Then one solution [similar to Eq. (9)] is
                                        x(1) (t) = ξeρt ,                            (21)
where ξ satisfies
                                       (A − ρI)ξ = 0.                                (22)
By proceeding as in Example 2, we find that a second solution [similar to Eq. (19)] is
                                   x(2) (t) = ξteρt + ηeρt ,                         (23)
where ξ satisfies Eq. (22) and η is determined from
                                       (A − ρI)η = ξ.                                (24)
Even though det(A − ρI) = 0, it can be shown that it is always possible to solve
Eq. (24) for η. Note that if we multiply Eq. (24) by A − ρI and use Eq. (22), then we
obtain
                                      (A − ρI)2 η = 0.
The vector η is called a generalized eigenvector of the matrix A corresponding to the
eigenvalue ρ.
Fundamental Matrices. As explained in Section 7.7, fundamental matrices are formed
by arranging linearly independent solutions in columns. Thus, for example, a
fundamental matrix for the system (8) can be formed from the solutions x(1) (t) and
x(2) (t) from Eqs. (9) and (19), respectively:
                                2t                                
                                    e           te2t                   1        t
                     (t) =                                 =e  2t
                                                                                       .          (25)
                                 −e2t −te2t − e2t                    −1 −1 − t
The particular fundamental matrix  that satisfies (0) = I can also be readily found
from the relation (t) = (t)−1 (0). For Eq. (8) we have
                                                                     
                                      1      0              −1             1      0
                      (0) =                      ,        (0) =                    ,            (26)
                                   −1 −1                                −1 −1
and then
                                                                        
                                                          1        t          1      0
                    (t) = (t)−1 (0) = e2t
                                                         −1    −1 − t       −1      −1
                                                       
                                                         1−t       −t
                                              =e    2t
                                                                         .                        (27)
                                                          t      1+t
The latter matrix is also the exponential matrix exp(At).
Jordan Forms. An n × n matrix A can be diagonalized as discussed in Section 7.7 only if
it has a full complement of n linearly independent eigenvectors. If there is a shortage
of eigenvectors (because of repeated eigenvalues), then A can always be transformed
into a nearly diagonal matrix called its Jordan6 form, which has the eigenvalues of
A on the main diagonal, ones in certain positions on the diagonal above the main
diagonal, and zeros elsewhere.
   Consider again the matrix A given by Eq. (2). To transform A into its Jordan form,
we construct the transformation matrix T with the single eigenvector ξ from Eq. (6)
in its first column and the generalized eigenvector η from Eq. (17) with k = 0 in the
second column. Then T and its inverse are given by
                                                                  
                                      1      0                        1       0
                          T=                      ,       T−1 =                   .               (28)
                                   −1 −1                             −1 −1
As you can verify, it follows that
                                                      
                                        −1              2     1
                                      T AT =                       = J.                           (29)
                                                        0     2
The matrix J in Eq. (29) is the Jordan form of A. It is typical of all Jordan forms in that
it has a 1 above the main diagonal in the column corresponding to the eigenvector
that is lacking (and is replaced in T by the generalized eigenvector).
   If we start again from Eq. (1)
                                                  x = Ax,
6 Marie Ennemond Camille Jordan (1838–1922) was professor at the École Polytechnique and the Collège
de France. He is known for his important contributions to analysis and to topology (the Jordan curve
theorem) and especially for his foundational work in group theory. The Jordan form of a matrix appeared
in his influential book Traité des substitutions et des équations algébriques, published in 1870.
the transformation x = Ty, where T is given by Eq. (28), produces the system
                                                y = Jy,                              (30)
where J is given by Eq. (29). In scalar form the system (30) is
                                    y1 = 2y1 + y2 ,          y2 = 2y2 .             (31)
These equations can be solved readily in reverse order—that is, by starting with the
equation for y2 . In this way we obtain
                                y2 = c1 e2t ,      y1 = c1 te2t + c2 e2t .            (32)
Thus two independent solutions of the system (30) are
                                                                      
                                           1 2t                           t 2t
                            y(1) (t) =        e ,        y(2) (t) =         e ,       (33)
                                           0                             1
and the corresponding fundamental matrix is
                                                  2t
                                                   e          te2t
                                         ˆ
                                         (t) =                     .                 (34)
                                                     0         e2t
         ˆ
Since (0)    = I, we can also identify the matrix in Eq. (34) as exp(Jt). The same result
can be reached by calculating powers of J and substituting them into the exponential
series (see Problems 20 through 22). To obtain a fundamental matrix for the original
system, we now form the product
                                                     2t
                                                         e             te2t
                          (t) = T exp(Jt) =                                    ,     (35)
                                                      −e   2t
                                                                  −e − te2t
                                                                      2t
which is the same as the fundamental matrix given in Eq. (25).
   We will not discuss n × n systems x = Ax in more detail here. For large n it is
possible that there may be eigenvalues of high algebraic multiplicity m, perhaps with
much lower geometric multiplicity q, thus giving rise to m − q generalized eigenvec-
tors. For n ≥ 4 there may also be repeated complex eigenvalues. A full discussion7
of the Jordan form of a general n × n matrix requires a greater background in linear
algebra than we assume for most readers of this book. Problems 18 through 22 ask
you to explore the use of Jordan forms for systems of three equations.
   The amount of arithmetic required in the analysis of a general n × n system may
be prohibitive to do by hand even if n is no greater than 3 or 4. Consequently, suitable
computer software should be used routinely in most cases. This does not overcome
all difficulties by any means, but it does make many problems much more tractable.
Finally, for a set of equations arising from modeling a physical system, it is likely
that some of the elements in the coefficient matrix A result from measurements of
some physical quantity. The inevitable uncertainties in such measurements lead to
uncertainties in the values of the eigenvalues of A. For example, in such a case it
may not be clear whether two eigenvalues are actually equal or are merely close
together.
7 For example, see the books listed in the References at the end of this chapter.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4:
         (a) Draw a direction field and sketch a few trajectories.
         (b) Describe how the solutions behave as t → ∞.
         (c) Find the general solution of the system of equations.
                                                                          
               
                     3 −4                                        
                                                                       4 −2
          1. x =               x                             2. x =             x
                     1 −1                                              8 −4
                    3                                                        
               
                     −2      1                                   
                                                                       −3     5
                                                                              2
          3. x =                  x                          4. x =                x
                     − 14 − 21                                         − 25   2
         In each of Problems 5 and 6, find the general solution of the given system of equations.
                   ⎛                 ⎞                               ⎛                ⎞
                     1     1       1                                   0    1       1
                   ⎜                 ⎟                               ⎜                ⎟
          5. x = ⎝2       1 −1⎠ x                           6. x = ⎝1     0       1⎠ x
                     0 −1          1                                   1    1       0
         In each of Problems 7 through 10:
         (a) Find the solution of the given initial value problem.
         (b) Draw the trajectory of the solution in the x1 x2 -plane, and also draw the graph of x1
         versus t.
                                             
               
                     1 −4                        3
          7. x =               x,       x(0) =
                     4 −7                        2
                    5                            
                     −       3
                                                      3
          8. x =      2     2
                                  x,      x(0) =
                    − 23     1                      −1
                            2
                             3
                                                  
               
                       2     2                        3
          9. x =                  x,      x(0) =
                    −2 3
                           −1                       −2
                                                 
               
                       3     9                     2
         10. x =                  x,      x(0) =
                     −1 −3                         4
         In each of Problems 11 and 12:
         (a) Find the solution of the given initial value problem.
         (b) Draw the corresponding trajectory in x1 x2 x3 -space, and also draw the graph of x1 versus t.
                   ⎛                   ⎞                ⎛     ⎞
                       1     0       0                     −1
                   ⎜                   ⎟                ⎜     ⎟
         11. x = ⎝−4        1       0⎠ x,       x(0) = ⎝ 2⎠
                       3     6       2                    −30
                   ⎛                    ⎞                ⎛ ⎞
                     −  5
                              1       1                     2
                   ⎜ 2                  ⎟                ⎜ ⎟
                  ⎜
         12. x = ⎝ 1 − 2      5
                                      1⎟⎠ x,      x(0) = ⎝  3⎠
                        1     1 −2    5                    −1
         In each of Problems 13 and 14, solve the given system of equations by the method of Problem
         19 of Section 7.5. Assume that t > 0.
                                                                           
                      3 −4                                              1 −4
         13. tx =              x                           14. tx =            x
                      1 −1                                              4 −7
15. Show that all solutions of the system
                                                              
                                                      a     b
                                               x =               x
                                                       c     d
    approach zero as t → ∞ if and only if a + d < 0 and ad − bc > 0. Compare this result
    with that of Problem 37 in Section 3.4.
16. Consider again the electric circuit in Problem 26 of Section 7.6. This circuit is described
    by the system of differential equations
                                                  ⎛                 ⎞
                                                               1      
                                   d I            ⎜ 0            L ⎟
                                              =⎜                    ⎟ I .
                                  dt V            ⎝ 1            1 ⎠ V
                                                    −        −
                                                      C        RC
    (a) Show that the eigenvalues are real and equal if L = 4R2 C.
    (b) Suppose that R = 1 , C = 1 F, and L = 4 H. Suppose also that I(0) = 1 A and
    V(0) = 2 V. Find I(t) and V(t).
17. Consider again the system
                                                                  
                                                         1     −1
                                          x = Ax =                    x                        (i)
                                                          1       3
    that we discussed in Example 2. We found there that A has a double eigenvalue r1 = r2 = 2
    with a single independent eigenvector ξ (1) = (1, −1)T , or any nonzero multiple thereof.
    Thus one solution of the system (i) is x(1) (t) = ξ (1) e2t and a second independent solution
    has the form
                                            x(2) (t) = ξte2t + ηe2t ,
    where ξ and η satisfy
                                  (A − 2I)ξ = 0,            (A − 2I)η = ξ.                    (ii)
    In the text we solved the first equation for ξ and then the second equation for η. Here we
    ask you to proceed in the reverse order.
    (a) Show that η satisfies (A − 2I)2 η = 0.
    (b) Show that (A − 2I)2 = 0. Thus the generalized eigenvector η can be chosen arbitrarily,
    except that it must be independent of ξ (1) .
    (c) Let η = (0, −1)T . Then determine ξ from the second of Eqs. (ii) and observe that
    ξ = (1, −1)T = ξ (1) . This choice of η reproduces the solution found in Example 2.
    (d) Let η = (1, 0)T and determine the corresponding eigenvector ξ.
    (e) Let η = (k1 , k2 )T , where k1 and k2 are arbitrary numbers. Then determine ξ. How is
    it related to the eigenvector ξ (1) ?
Eigenvalues of Multiplicity 3. If the matrix A has an eigenvalue of algebraic multiplicity 3,
then there may be either one, two, or three corresponding linearly independent eigenvectors.
The general solution of the system x = Ax is different, depending on the number of eigenvec-
tors associated with the triple eigenvalue. As noted in the text, there is no difficulty if there
are three eigenvectors, since then there are three independent solutions of the form x = ξert .
The following two problems illustrate the solution procedure for a triple eigenvalue with one
or two eigenvectors, respectively.
18. Consider the system
                                                ⎛                  ⎞
                                                    1       1    1
                                                ⎜                  ⎟
                                   x = Ax = ⎝ 2            1   −1⎠ x.                            (i)
                                                   −3       2    4
    (a) Show that r = 2 is an eigenvalue of algebraic multiplicity 3 of the coefficient matrix
    A and that there is only one corresponding eigenvector, namely,
                                                     ⎛ ⎞
                                                         0
                                               (1)   ⎜ ⎟
                                             ξ = ⎝ 1⎠ .
                                                      −1
    (b) Using the information in part (a), write down one solution x(1) (t) of the system (i).
    There is no other solution of the purely exponential form x = ξert .
    (c) To find a second solution, assume that x = ξte2t + ηe2t . Show that ξ and η satisfy the
    equations
                                 (A − 2I)ξ = 0,         (A − 2I)η = ξ.
    Since ξ has already been found in part (a), solve the second equation for η. Neglect the
    multiple of ξ (1) that appears in η, since it leads only to a multiple of the first solution x(1) .
    Then write down a second solution x(2) (t) of the system (i).
    (d) To find a third solution, assume that x = ξ(t 2 /2)e2t + ηte2t + ζe2t . Show that ξ, η, and ζ
    satisfy the equations
                        (A − 2I)ξ = 0,       (A − 2I)η = ξ,        (A − 2I)ζ = η.
    The first two equations are the same as in part (c), so solve the third equation for ζ, again
    neglecting the multiple of ξ (1) that appears. Then write down a third solution x(3) (t) of the
    system (i).
    (e) Write down a fundamental matrix (t) for the system (i).
    (f) Form a matrix T with the eigenvector ξ (1) in the first column and the generalized
    eigenvectors η and ζ in the second and third columns. Then find T−1 and form the product
    J = T−1AT. The matrix J is the Jordan form of A.
19. Consider the system
                                                ⎛                  ⎞
                                                    5    −3     −2
                                                ⎜                  ⎟
                                   x = Ax = ⎝ 8         −5     −4⎠ x.                            (i)
                                                   −4       3    3
    (a) Show that r = 1 is a triple eigenvalue of the coefficient matrix A and that there are
    only two linearly independent eigenvectors, which we may take as
                                            ⎛ ⎞                ⎛ ⎞
                                             1                    0
                                            ⎜ ⎟                ⎜ ⎟
                                    ξ (1) = ⎝0⎠ ,      ξ (2) = ⎝ 2⎠ .                            (ii)
                                             2                  −3
    Write down two linearly independent solutions x(1) (t) and x(2) (t) of Eq. (i).
    (b) To find a third solution, assume that x = ξtet + ηet ; then show that ξ and η must satisfy
                                              (A − I)ξ = 0,                                     (iii)
                                              (A − I)η = ξ.                                     (iv)
    (c) Equation (iii) is satisfied if ξ is an eigenvector, so one way to proceed is to choose
    ξ to be a suitable linear combination of ξ (1) and ξ (2) so that Eq. (iv) is solvable, and then
    to solve that equation for η. However, let us proceed in a different way and follow the
    pattern of Problem 17. First, show that η satisfies
                                              (A − I)2 η = 0.
    Further, show that (A − I)2 = 0. Thus η can be chosen arbitrarily, except that it must be
    independent of ξ (1) and ξ (2) .
    (d) A convenient choice for η is η = (0, 0, 1)T . Find the corresponding ξ from Eq. (iv).
    Verify that ξ is an eigenvector.
    (e) Write down a fundamental matrix (t) for the system (i).
    (f) Form a matrix T with the eigenvector ξ (1) in the first column and with the eigenvector
    ξ from part (d) and the generalized eigenvector η in the other two columns. Find T−1 and
    form the product J = T−1AT. The matrix J is the Jordan form of A.
                      
               λ 1
20. Let J =              , where λ is an arbitrary real number.
               0 λ
    (a) Find J2 , J3 , and J4 .                                        
                                                              λn nλn−1
    (b) Use an inductive argument to show that J =       n
                                                                          .
                                                              0      λn
    (c) Determine exp(Jt).
    (d) Use exp(Jt) to solve the initial value problem x = Jx, x(0) = x0 .
21. Let
                                                ⎛             ⎞
                                                  λ     0   0
                                                ⎜             ⎟
                                           J = ⎝0      λ    1⎠ ,
                                                  0     0   λ
    where λ is an arbitrary real number.
    (a) Find J2 , J3 , and J4 .
    (b) Use an inductive argument to show that
                                            ⎛ n                   ⎞
                                              λ       0        0
                                            ⎜                     ⎟
                                       Jn = ⎝ 0      λn     nλn−1 ⎠ .
                                               0      0       λn
    (c) Determine exp(Jt).
    (d) Observe that if you choose λ = 1, then the matrix J in this problem is the same as
    the matrix J in Problem 19(f). Using the matrix T from Problem 19(f), form the product
    T exp(Jt) with λ = 1. Is the resulting matrix the same as the fundamental matrix (t) in
    Problem 19(e)? If not, explain the discrepancy.
22. Let
                                                ⎛             ⎞
                                                  λ     1   0
                                                ⎜             ⎟
                                           J = ⎝0      λ    1⎠ ,
                                                  0     0   λ
    where λ is an arbitrary real number.
    (a) Find J2 , J3 , and J4 .
                 (b) Use an inductive argument to show that
                                                  ⎛ n                                      ⎞
                                                    λ        nλn−1      [n(n − 1)/2]λn−2
                                                  ⎜                                        ⎟
                                             Jn = ⎝ 0         λn                nλn−1      ⎠.
                                                     0         0                  λn
                 (c) Determine exp(Jt).
                 (d) Note that if you choose λ = 2, then the matrix J in this problem is the same as the
                 matrix J in Problem 18(f). Using the matrix T from Problem 18(f), form the product
                 T exp(Jt) with λ = 2. The resulting matrix is the same as the fundamental matrix (t) in
                 Problem 18(e).
7.9 Nonhomogeneous Linear Systems
             In this section we turn to the nonhomogeneous system
                                                        x = P(t)x + g(t),                           (1)
             where the n × n matrix P(t) and n × 1 vector g(t) are continuous for α < t < β. By
             the same argument as in Section 3.5 (see also Problem 16 in this section), the general
             solution of Eq. (1) can be expressed as
                                             x = c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cn x(n) (t) + v(t),           (2)
             where c1 x(1) (t) + · · · + cn x(n) (t) is the general solution of the homogeneous system
             x = P(t)x, and v(t) is a particular solution of the nonhomogeneous system (1). We
             will briefly describe several methods for determining v(t).
             Diagonalization. We begin with systems of the form
                                                          x = Ax + g(t),                            (3)
             where A is an n × n diagonalizable constant matrix. By diagonalizing the coefficient
             matrix A, as indicated in Section 7.7, we can transform Eq. (3) into a system of
             equations that is readily solvable.
                Let T be the matrix whose columns are the eigenvectors ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (n) of A, and
             define a new dependent variable y by
                                                              x = Ty.                                (4)
             Then, substituting for x in Eq. (3), we obtain
                                                       Ty = ATy + g(t).
             When we multiply by T−1 , it follows that
                                           y = (T−1AT)y + T−1 g(t) = Dy + h(t),                     (5)
             where h(t) = T−1 g(t) and where D is the diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries
             are the eigenvalues r1 , . . . , rn of A, arranged in the same order as the corresponding
             eigenvectors ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (n) that appear as columns of T. Equation (5) is a system of
        n uncoupled equations for y1 (t), . . . , yn (t); as a consequence, the equations can be
        solved separately. In scalar form, Eq. (5) has the form
                                       yj (t) = rj yj (t) + hj (t),            j = 1, . . . , n,          (6)
        where hj (t) is a certain linear combination of g1 (t), . . . , gn (t). Equation (6) is a first
        order linear equation and can be solved by the methods of Section 2.1. In fact, we
        have                                      t
                               yj (t) = erj t        e−rj s hj (s) ds + cj erj t ,      j = 1, . . . , n,  (7)
                                                t0
        where the cj are arbitrary constants. Finally, the solution x of Eq. (3) is obtained from
        Eq. (4). When multiplied by the transformation matrix T, the second term on the
        right side of Eq. (7) produces the general solution of the homogeneous equation
        x = Ax, while the first term on the right side of Eq. (7) yields a particular solution of
        the nonhomogeneous system (3).
        Find the general solution of the system
EXAMPLE                                                                   
                                                −2           1          2e−t
   1                                   x =
                                                     1 −2
                                                                 x+
                                                                         3t
                                                                                 = Ax + g(t).              (8)
            Proceeding as in Section 7.5, we find that the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix are
        r1 = −3 and r2 = −1 and that the corresponding eigenvectors are
                                                                                  
                                                 (1)           1           (2)       1
                                               ξ =                 ,     ξ =            .                  (9)
                                                            −1                       1
            Thus the general solution of the homogeneous system is
                                                                              
                                                               1 −3t             1 −t
                                               x = c1              e + c2            e .                  (10)
                                                             −1                  1
        Before writing down the matrix T of eigenvectors, we recall that eventually we must find T−1 .
        The coefficient matrix A is real and symmetric, so we can use the result stated just above
        Example 3 in Section 7.7: T−1 is simply the adjoint or (since T is real) the transpose of T,
        provided that the eigenvectors of A are normalized so that (ξ, ξ) = 1. Hence, upon normalizing
        ξ (1) and ξ (2) , we have
                                                                                               
                                           1         1       1            −1        1 1 −1
                                   T= √                          ,      T = √                       .     (11)
                                            2 −1             1                       2 1         1
            Letting x = Ty and substituting for x in Eq. (8), we obtain the following system of equations
        for the new dependent variable y:
                                                                                                   
                                              −1               −3       0           1 2e−t − 3t
                               y = Dy + T g(t) =                             y+ √             −t
                                                                                                        . (12)
                                                                  0 −1                2 2e + 3t
        Thus
                                                                     √ −t        3
                                                     y1 + 3y1 =      2e − √ t,
                                                                                   2
                                                                                                          (13)
                                                                     √ −t        3
                                                      y2 + y2 =      2e + √ t.
                                                                                   2
Each of Eqs. (13) is a first order linear equation and so can be solved by the methods of Section
2.1. In this way we obtain
                                     √                      
                                        2 −t   3      t     1
                                y1 =      e −√           −       + c1 e−3t ,
                                       2        2     3     9
                                                                                            (14)
                                     √ −t      3                −t
                                y2 = 2te + √ (t − 1) + c2 e .
                                                2
Finally, we write the solution in terms of the original variables:
                                       
                          1     y1 + y2
              x = Ty = √
                           2 −y1 + y2
                  ⎛        √              √                           ⎞
                      (c1 / 2)e−3t + (c2 / 2) + 21 e−t + t − 43 + te−t
                  ⎜                                                     ⎟
                =⎝         √ −3t          √                           ⎠
                    −(c1 / 2)e + (c2 / 2) − 2 e−t + 2t − 3 + te−t
                                                 1             5
                                                                            
                         1 −3t         1 −t 1        1 −t        1     −t     1     1 4
                = k1         e + k2        e +          e +          te +        t−      ,  (15)
                       −1              1       2 −1              1            2     3 5
                   √                 √
where k1 = c1 / 2 and k2 = c2 / 2. The first two terms on the right side of Eq. (15) form the
general solution of the homogeneous system corresponding to Eq. (8). The remaining terms
are a particular solution of the nonhomogeneous system.
   If the coefficient matrix A in Eq. (3) is not diagonalizable (because of repeated
eigenvalues and a shortage of eigenvectors), it can nevertheless be reduced to
a Jordan form J by a suitable transformation matrix T involving both eigen-
vectors and generalized eigenvectors. In this case the differential equations for
y1 , . . . , yn are not totally uncoupled since some rows of J have two nonzero ele-
ments: an eigenvalue in the diagonal position and a 1 in the adjacent position to
the right. However, the equations for y1 , . . . , yn can still be solved consecutively,
starting with yn . Then the solution of the original system (3) can be found by the
relation x = Ty.
Undetermined Coefficients. A second way to find a particular solution of the nonho-
mogeneous system (1) is the method of undetermined coefficients that we first
discussed in Section 3.5. To use this method, we assume the form of the solution
with some or all of the coefficients unspecified, and then seek to determine these
coefficients so as to satisfy the differential equation. As a practical matter, this
method is applicable only if the coefficient matrix P is a constant matrix, and if
the components of g are polynomial, exponential, or sinusoidal functions, or sums
or products of these. In these cases the correct form of the solution can be pre-
dicted in a simple and systematic manner. The procedure for choosing the form of
the solution is substantially the same as that given in Section 3.5 for linear second
order equations. The main difference is illustrated by the case of a nonhomogeneous
term of the form ueλt , where λ is a simple root of the characteristic equation. In
this situation, rather than assuming a solution of the form ateλt , it is necessary to
use ateλt + beλt , where a and b are determined by substituting into the differential
equation.
        Use the method of undetermined coefficients to find a particular solution of
EXAMPLE                                                          
                                           −2       1          2e−t
   2                                 
                                   x =
                                            1 −2
                                                       x+
                                                                3t
                                                                        = Ax + g(t).                      (16)
          This is the same system of equations as in Example 1. To use the method of undetermined
        coefficients, we write g(t) in the form
                                                                  
                                                        2 −t          0
                                              g(t) =        e +            t.                             (17)
                                                        0             3
        Observe that r = −1 is an eigenvalue of the coefficient matrix, and therefore we must include
        both ate−t and be−t in the assumed solution. Thus we assume that
                                         x = v(t) = ate−t + be−t + ct + d,                                (18)
        where a, b, c, and d are vectors to be determined. By substituting Eq. (18) into Eq. (16) and
        collecting terms, we obtain the following algebraic equations for a, b, c, and d:
                                                Aa = −a,
                                                                   
                                                                    2
                                                Ab = a − b −             ,
                                                                    0
                                                                                                        (19)
                                                            0
                                                Ac = −          ,
                                                            3
                                                Ad = c.
        From the first of Eqs. (19), we see that a is an eigenvector of A corresponding to the eigenvalue
        r = −1. Thus aT = (α, α), where α is any nonzero constant. Then we find that the second of
        Eqs. (19) can be solved only if α = 1 and that in this case,
                                                            
                                                           1        0
                                                 b=k           −                                          (20)
                                                           1        1
        for any constant k. The simplest choice is k = 0, from which bT = (0, −1). Then the third and
        fourth of Eqs. (19) yield cT = (1, 2) and dT = (− 43 , − 53 ), respectively. Finally, from Eq. (18) we
        obtain the particular solution
                                                                           
                                           1     −t      0 −t          1       1 4
                                  v(t) =       te −          e +            t−       .                    (21)
                                           1             1             2       3 5
        The particular solution (21) is not identical to the one contained in Eq. (15) of Example 1
        because the term in e−t is different. However, if we choose k = 21 in Eq. (20), then bT = ( 21 , − 21 )
        and the two particular solutions agree.
        Variation of Parameters. Now let us turn to more general problems in which the
        coefficient matrix is not constant or not diagonalizable. Let
                                                x = P(t)x + g(t),                                        (22)
        where P(t) and g(t) are continuous on α < t < β. Assume that a fundamental matrix
        (t) for the corresponding homogeneous system
                                                     x = P(t)x                                           (23)
has been found. We use the method of variation of parameters to construct a partic-
ular solution, and hence the general solution, of the nonhomogeneous system (22).
   Since the general solution of the homogeneous system (23) is (t)c, it is natural to
proceed as in Section 3.6 and to seek a solution of the nonhomogeneous system (22)
by replacing the constant vector c by a vector function u(t). Thus we assume that
                                        x = (t)u(t),                                   (24)
where u(t) is a vector to be found. Upon differentiating x as given by Eq. (24) and
requiring that Eq. (22) be satisfied, we obtain
                       (t)u(t) + (t)u (t) = P(t)(t)u(t) + g(t).                    (25)
Since (t) is a fundamental matrix,  (t) = P(t)(t); hence Eq. (25) reduces to
                                     (t)u (t) = g(t).                                 (26)
Recall that (t) is nonsingular on any interval where P is continuous. Hence −1 (t)
exists, and therefore
                                    u (t) = −1 (t)g(t).                               (27)
Thus for u(t) we can select any vector from the class of vectors that satisfy Eq. (27).
These vectors are determined only up to an arbitrary additive constant vector;
therefore, we denote u(t) by
                                        
                               u(t) = −1 (t)g(t) dt + c,                               (28)
where the constant vector c is arbitrary. If the integrals in Eq. (28) can be evaluated,
then the general solution of the system (22) is found by substituting for u(t) from
Eq. (28) in Eq. (24). However, even if the integrals cannot be evaluated, we can still
write the general solution of Eq. (22) in the form
                                                  t
                           x = (t)c + (t)          −1 (s)g(s) ds,                    (29)
                                                  t1
where t1 is any point in the interval (α, β). The first term on the right side of Eq. (29) is
the general solution of the corresponding homogeneous system (23), and the second
term is a particular solution of Eq. (22).
   Now let us consider the initial value problem consisting of the differential equation
(22) and the initial condition
                                          x(t0 ) = x0 .                                 (30)
We can find the solution of this problem most conveniently if we choose the lower
limit of integration in Eq. (29) to be the initial point t0 . Then the general solution of
the differential equation is
                                                  t
                           x = (t)c + (t)          −1 (s)g(s) ds.                    (31)
                                                  t0
For t = t0 the integral in Eq. (31) is zero, so the initial condition (30) is also satisfied
if we choose
                                       c = −1 (t0 )x0 .                                (32)
        Therefore,                                                      t
                                               −1
                                 x = (t) (t0 )x + (t) 0
                                                                           −1 (s)g(s) ds             (33)
                                                                        t0
        is the solution of the given initial value problem. Again, although it is helpful to use
        −1 to write the solutions (29) and (33), it is usually better in particular cases to solve
        the necessary equations by row reduction than to calculate −1 and substitute into
        Eqs. (29) and (33).
           The solution (33) takes a slightly simpler form if we use the fundamental matrix
        (t) satisfying (t0 ) = I. In this case we have
                                                                 t
                                       x = (t)x + (t)
                                                  0
                                                                     −1 (s)g(s) ds.                  (34)
                                                                  t0
        Equation (34) can be simplified further if the coefficient matrix P(t) is a constant
        matrix (see Problem 17).
        Use the method of variation of parameters to find the general solution of the system
EXAMPLE                                                              
                                            −2       1            2e−t
   3                                  
                                    x =
                                              1 −2
                                                          x+
                                                                    3t
                                                                           = Ax + g(t).               (35)
        This is the same system of equations as in Examples 1 and 2.
           The general solution of the corresponding homogeneous system was given in Eq. (10). Thus
                                                                           
                                                              e−3t e−t
                                                (t) =                                                (36)
                                                           −e−3t e−t
        is a fundamental matrix. Then the solution x of Eq. (35) is given by x = (t)u(t), where u(t)
        satisfies (t)u (t) = g(t), or
                                                                           
                                              e−3t e−t          u1        2e−t
                                                                       =           .                  (37)
                                            −e−3t e−t           u2          3t
        Solving Eq. (37) by row reduction, we obtain
                                                   u1 = e2t − 23 te3t ,
                                                   u2 = 1 + 23 tet .
        Hence
                                          u1 (t) = 21 e2t − 21 te3t + 16 e3t + c1 ,
                                          u2 (t) = t + 23 tet − 23 et + c2 ,
        and
                  x = (t)u(t)
                                                                                       
                             1 −3t           1 −t 1             1 −t          1      −t  1     1 4
                     = c1        e + c2          e +                 e +          te +      t−      , (38)
                            −1               1           2 −1                 1          2     3 5
        which is the same as the solution obtained in Example 1 [Eq. (15)] and is equivalent to the
        solution obtained in Example 2 [Eq. (21)].
        Laplace Transforms. We used the Laplace transform in Chapter 6 to solve linear equa-
        tions of arbitrary order. It can also be used in very much the same way to solve
        systems of equations. Since the transform is an integral, the transform of a vector is
        computed component by component. Thus L{x(t)} is the vector whose components
        are the transforms of the respective components of x(t), and similarly for L{x (t)}.
        We will denote L{x(t)} by X(s). Then, by an extension of Theorem 6.2.1 to vectors,
        we also have
                                             L{x (t)} = sX(s) − x(0).                            (39)
        Use the method of Laplace transforms to solve the system
EXAMPLE                                                         
                                            −2      1         2e−t
   4                                 x =
                                              1 −2
                                                        x+
                                                               3t
                                                                      = Ax + g(t).                 (40)
        This is the same system of equations as in Examples 1 through 3.
           We take the Laplace transform of each term in Eq. (40), obtaining
                                           sX(s) − x(0) = AX(s) + G(s),                            (41)
        where G(s) is the transform of g(t). The transform G(s) is given by
                                                                    
                                                           2/(s + 1)
                                                G(s) =                 .                           (42)
                                                             3/s2
        To proceed further we need to choose the initial vector x(0). For simplicity let us choose
        x(0) = 0. Then Eq. (41) becomes
                                                (sI − A)X(s) = G(s),                               (43)
        where, as usual, I is the identity matrix. Consequently, X(s) is given by
                                               X(s) = (sI − A)−1 G(s).                             (44)
        The matrix (sI − A)−1 is called the transfer matrix because multiplying it by the transform of
        the input vector g(t) yields the transform of the output vector x(t). In this example we have
                                                                        
                                                          s+2       −1
                                             sI − A =                      ,                       (45)
                                                           −1     s+2
        and by a straightforward calculation, we obtain
                                                                                 
                                            −1           1          s+2       1
                                   (sI − A)    =                                    .              (46)
                                                  (s + 1)(s + 3)      1      s+2
        Then, substituting from Eqs. (42) and (46) in Eq. (44) and carrying out the indicated multi-
        plication, we find that
                                           ⎛                                      ⎞
                                                 2(s + 2)                3
                                           ⎜ (s + 1)2 (s + 3) + s2 (s + 1)(s + 3) ⎟
                                           ⎜                                      ⎟
                                  X(s) = ⎜                                        ⎟.               (47)
                                           ⎝         2               3(s + 2)     ⎠
                                                              +
                                             (s + 1)2 (s + 3) s2 (s + 1)(s + 3)
        Finally, we need to obtain the solution x(t) from its transform X(s). This can be done by
        expanding the expressions in Eq. (47) in partial fractions and using Table 6.2.1, or (more
         efficiently) by using appropriate computer software. In any case, after some simplification the
         result is                                                              
                                     2 −t 2            1 −3t     1    −t     1       1 4
                           x(t) =          e −           e +        te +         t−         .          (48)
                                     1            3 −1           1           2       3 5
         Equation (48) gives the particular solution of the system (40) that satisfies the initial condition
         x(0) = 0. As a result, it differs slightly from the particular solutions obtained in the preceding
         three examples. To obtain the general solution of Eq. (40), you must add to the expression in
         Eq. (48) the general solution (10) of the homogeneous system corresponding to Eq. (40).
            Each of the methods for solving nonhomogeneous equations has some advantages
         and disadvantages. The method of undetermined coefficients requires no integra-
         tion, but it is limited in scope and may entail the solution of several sets of algebraic
         equations. The method of diagonalization requires finding the inverse of the trans-
         formation matrix and the solution of a set of uncoupled first order linear equations,
         followed by a matrix multiplication. Its main advantage is that for Hermitian coeffi-
         cient matrices, the inverse of the transformation matrix can be written down without
         calculation—a feature that is more important for large systems. The method of
         Laplace transforms involves a matrix inversion to find the transfer matrix, followed
         by a multiplication, and finally by the determination of the inverse transform of each
         term in the resulting expression. It is particularly useful in problems with forcing
         functions that involve discontinuous or impulsive terms. Variation of parameters is
         the most general method. On the other hand, it involves the solution of a set of lin-
         ear algebraic equations with variable coefficients, followed by an integration and a
         matrix multiplication, so it may also be the most complicated from a computational
         viewpoint. For many small systems with constant coefficients, such as the one in the
         examples in this section, all of these methods work well, and there may be little reason
         to select one over another.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 12 find the general solution of the given system of equations.
                                                                          √                 
                     2 −1             et                                  1      3            et
               
           1. x =               x+                                
                                                              2. x = √              x + √ −t
                     3 −2             t                                   3 −1               3e
                                                                                       
               
                     2 −5             − cos t                     
                                                                        1     1         e−2t
           3. x =               x+                            4. x =              x+
                     1 −2                 sin t                         4 −2            −2et
                                           
               
                     4 −2                t −3
           5. x =               x+              ,     t>0
                     8 −4             −t −2
                                                
               
                     −4      2               t −1
           6. x =                x+                  ,    t>0
                       2 −1              2t −1 + 4
                                                                                 
               
                     1     1            2 t                       
                                                                        2 −1             1 t
           7. x =             x+             e                8. x =             x+           e
                     4     1         −1                                 3 −2           −1
                    5                                                     √        
               
                     −4       3
                                          2t                      
                                                                        −3       2          1 −t
           9. x =             4
                                  x+ t                       10. x =   √            x+           e
                       3
                            − 5           e                               2    −2         −1
                       4      4
                                
      
            2   −5             0
11. x =              x+              ,      0<t<π
            1   −2          cos t
                                
            2   −5           csc t          π
12. x =             x+              ,         <t<π
            1   −2           sec t           2
13. The electric circuit shown in Figure 7.9.1 is described by the system of differential equations
                                               1                1
                                       dx      − 2 − 18             2
                                           =                 x  +       I(t),                    (i)
                                       dt         2 − 21            0
    where x1 is the current through the inductor, x2 is the voltage drop across the capacitor,
    and I(t) is the current supplied by the external source.
    (a) Determine a fundamental matrix (t) for the homogeneous system corresponding to
    Eq. (i). Refer to Problem 25 of Section 7.6.
    (b) If I(t) = e−t/2 , determine the solution of the system (i) that also satisfies the initial
    conditions x(0) = 0.
                                               L = 8 henrys
                                I(t)
                                                                       1
                                                                  C = 2 farad
                               R = 4 ohms              R = 4 ohms
                            FIGURE 7.9.1 The circuit in Problem 13.
In each of Problems 14 and 15, verify that the given vector is the general solution of the
corresponding homogeneous system, and then solve the nonhomogeneous system. Assume
that t > 0.
                                                                 
             2 −1             1 − t2                       1           1 −1
14. tx =             x+                ,      x(c) = c1       t + c2       t
             3 −2               2t                         1           3
                                                                   
             3 −2              −2t                         1 −1           2 2
15. tx =             x+ 4              ,      x(c) = c1       t + c2         t
             2 −2             t −1                         2              1
16. Let x = φ(t) be the general solution of x = P(t)x + g(t), and let x = v(t) be some
    particular solution of the same system. By considering the difference φ(t) − v(t), show
    that φ(t) = u(t) + v(t), where u(t) is the general solution of the homogeneous system
    x = P(t)x.
17. Consider the initial value problem
                                        x = Ax + g(t),         x(0) = x0 .
    (a) By referring to Problem 15(c) in Section 7.7, show that
                                                       t
                                       x = (t)x +0
                                                           (t − s)g(s) ds.
                                                        0
                (b) Show also that
                                                                  t
                                            x = exp(At)x0 +          exp[A(t − s)]g(s) ds.
                                                                  0
                Compare these results with those of Problem 27 in Section 3.6.
           18. Use the Laplace transform to solve the system
                                                                         
                                                 −2          1        2e−t
                                           x =                   x+            = Ax + g(t)                          (i)
                                                     1 −2                3t
                used in the examples in this section. Instead of using zero initial conditions, as in Example
                4, let                                                
                                                                       α1
                                                             x(0) =         ,                                      (ii)
                                                                       α2
                where α1 and α2 are arbitrary. How must α1 and α2 be chosen so that the solution is identical
                to Eq. (38)?
REFERENCES Further information on matrices and linear algebra is available in any introductory book on the subject.
           Here is a representative sample:
           Anton, H. and Rorres, C., Elementary Linear Algebra (10th ed.) (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2010).
           Johnson, L. W., Riess, R. D., and Arnold, J. T., Introduction to Linear Algebra (6th ed.) (Boston: Addison-
              Wesley, 2008).
           Kolman, B. and Hill, D. R., Elementary Linear Algebra (8th ed.) (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2004).
           Lay, D. C., Linear Algebra and Its Applications(4th ed.)(Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2012).
           Leon, S. J., Linear Algebra with Applications (8th ed.) (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice-Hall,
              2010).
           Strang, G., Linear Algebra and Its Applications (4th ed.)(Belmont, CA: Thomson, Brooks/Cole, 2006).
              A more extended treatment of systems of first order linear equations may be found in many books,
           including the following:
           Coddington, E. A. and Carlson, R., Linear Ordinary Differential Equations (Philadelphia, PA: Society for
              Industrial and Applied Mahematics, 1997).
           Hirsch, M. W., Smale, S., and Devaney, R. L., Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems, and an Introduc-
              tion to Chaos (2nd ed.)(San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2004).
              The following book treats elementary differential equations with a particular emphasis on systems of
           first order equations:
              Brannan, J. R. and Boyce, W. E., Differential Equations: An Introduction to Modern Methods and
           Applications (2nd ed.) (New York: Wiley, 2011).
 CHAPTER
     8
               Numerical
               Methods
               Up to this point we have discussed methods for solving differential equations by using
               analytical techniques such as integration or series expansions. Usually, the emphasis
               was on finding an exact expression for the solution. Unfortunately, there are many
               important problems in engineering and science, especially nonlinear ones, to which
               these methods either do not apply or are very complicated to use. In this chapter
               we discuss an alternative approach, the use of numerical approximation methods to
               obtain an accurate approximation to the solution of an initial value problem. We
               present these methods in the simplest possible context, namely, a single scalar first
               order equation. However, they can readily be extended to systems of first order
               equations, and this is outlined briefly in Section 8.5. The procedures described here
               can be executed easily on personal computers.
8.1 The Euler or Tangent Line Method
               To discuss the development and use of numerical approximation procedures, we
               will concentrate mainly on the first order initial value problem consisting of the
               differential equation
                                                       dy
                                                          = f (t, y)                                (1)
                                                       dt
               and the initial condition
                                                       y(t0 ) = y0 .                                (2)
               We assume that the functions f and fy are continuous on some rectangle in the ty-plane
               containing the point (t0 , y0 ). Then, by Theorem 2.4.2, there exists a unique solution
               y = φ(t) of the given problem in some interval about t0 . If Eq. (1) is nonlinear, then
                                                                                                  451
the interval of existence of the solution may be difficult to determine and may have
no simple relationship to the function f . However, in all our discussions we assume
that there is a unique solution of the initial value problem (1), (2) in the interval of
interest.
    In Section 2.7 we described the oldest and simplest numerical approximation
method, namely, the Euler or tangent line method. To derive this method, let us
write the differential equation (1) at the point t = tn in the form
                                                  dφ
                                                      (tn ) = f [tn , φ(tn )].                      (3)
                                                  dt
Then we approximate the derivative in Eq. (3) by the corresponding (forward)
difference quotient, obtaining
                                            φ(tn+1 ) − φ(tn ) ∼
                                                                 = f [tn , φ(tn )].                 (4)
                                                tn+1 − tn
Finally, if we replace φ(tn+1 ) and φ(tn ) by their approximate values yn+1 and yn ,
respectively, and solve for yn+1 , we obtain the Euler formula
                                 yn+1 = yn + f (tn , yn )(tn+1 − tn ),         n = 0, 1, 2, . . . . (5)
If the step size tn+1 − tn has a uniform value h for all n and if we denote f (tn , yn ) by
fn , then Eq. (5) simplifies to
                                         yn+1 = yn + hfn ,          n = 0, 1, 2, . . . .            (6)
Euler’s method consists of repeatedly evaluating Eq. (5) or (6), using the result
of each step to execute the next step. In this way we obtain a sequence of values
y0 , y1 , y2 , . . . , yn , . . . that approximate the values of the solution φ(t) at the points
t0 , t1 , t2 , . . . , tn , . . . .
    A computer program for Euler’s method has a structure such as that shown below.
The specific instructions can be written in any convenient programming language.
                                                   The Euler Method
                                 Step 1.     define f (t, y)
                                 Step 2.     input initial values t0 and y0
                                 Step 3.     input step size h and number of steps n
                                 Step 4.     output t0 and y0
                                 Step 5.     for j from 1 to n do
                                 Step 6.        k1 = f (t, y)
                                                y = y + h ∗ k1
                                                t =t+h
                                 Step 7.     output t and y
                                 Step 8.     end
            Some examples of Euler’s method appear in Section 2.7. As another example,
        consider the initial value problem
                                                y = 1 − t + 4y,                                      (7)
                                                    y(0) = 1.                                         (8)
        Equation (7) is a first order linear equation, and you can easily verify that the solution
        satisfying the initial condition (8) is
                                          y = φ(t) = 14 t − 163
                                                                + 19
                                                                   16
                                                                      e4t .                           (9)
        Since the exact solution is known, we do not need numerical methods to approx-
        imate the solution of the initial value problem (7), (8). On the other hand, the
        availability of the exact solution makes it easy to determine the accuracy of any
        numerical procedure that we use on this problem. We will use this problem through-
        out the chapter to illustrate and compare different numerical methods. The solutions
        of Eq. (7) diverge rather rapidly from each other, so we should expect that it will
        be fairly difficult to approximate the solution (9) well over any interval of moder-
        ate length. Indeed, this is the reason for choosing this particular problem; it will be
        relatively easy to observe the benefits of using more efficient methods.
        Using the Euler formula (6) and step sizes h = 0.05, 0.025, 0.01, and 0.001, determine approx-
EXAMPLE imate values of the solution y = φ(t) of the problem (7), (8) on the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 2.
   1        The indicated calculations were carried out on a computer, and some of the results are shown
        in Table 8.1.1. Their accuracy is not particularly impressive. For h = 0.01 the percentage error
        is 3.85% at t = 0.5, 7.49% at t = 1.0, and 14.4% at t = 2.0. The corresponding percentage
        errors for h = 0.001 are 0.40%, 0.79%, and 1.58%, respectively. Observe that if h = 0.001,
        then it requires 2000 steps to traverse the interval from t = 0 to t = 2. Thus considerable
        computation is needed to obtain even reasonably good accuracy for this problem using the
        Euler method. When we discuss other numerical approximation methods later in this chapter,
        we will find that it is possible to obtain comparable or better accuracy with much larger step
        sizes and many fewer computational steps.
         TABLE 8.1.1 A Comparison of Results for the Numerical Approximation of the Solution
         of y = 1 − t + 4y, y(0) = 1 Using the Euler Method for Different Step Sizes h
          t         h = 0.05          h = 0.025          h = 0.01             h = 0.001        Exact
         0.0         1.0000000         1.0000000          1.0000000            1.0000000      1.0000000
         0.1         1.5475000         1.5761188          1.5952901            1.6076289      1.6090418
         0.2         2.3249000         2.4080117          2.4644587            2.5011159      2.5053299
         0.3         3.4333560         3.6143837          3.7390345            3.8207130      3.8301388
         0.4         5.0185326         5.3690304          5.6137120            5.7754845      5.7942260
         0.5         7.2901870         7.9264062          8.3766865            8.6770692      8.7120041
         1.0       45.588400          53.807866          60.037126            64.382558      64.897803
         1.5      282.07187          361.75945         426.40818             473.55979      479.25919
         2.0     1745.6662          2432.7878         3029.3279             3484.1608      3540.2001
   To begin to investigate the errors in using numerical approximations, and also to
suggest ways to construct more accurate algorithms, it is helpful to mention some
alternative ways to look at the Euler method.
    One way to proceed is to write the problem as an integral equation. Let y = φ(t)
be the solution of the initial value problem (1), (2); then, by integrating from tn to
tn+1 , we obtain
                                    tn+1               tn+1
                                           
                                          φ (t) dt =            f [t, φ(t)] dt,
                                     tn                  tn
or                                                       tn+1
                                 φ(tn+1 ) = φ(tn ) +              f [t, φ(t)] dt.         (10)
                                                           tn
The integral in Eq. (10) is represented geometrically as the area under the curve in
Figure 8.1.1 between t = tn and t = tn+1 . If we approximate the integral by replacing
f [t, φ(t)] by its value f [tn , φ(tn )] at t = tn , then we are approximating the actual area
by the area of the shaded rectangle. In this way we obtain
                               φ(tn+1 ) ∼= φ(tn ) + f [tn , φ(tn )](tn+1 − tn )
                                         = φ(tn ) + hf [tn , φ(tn )].                     (11)
Finally, to obtain an approximation yn+1 for φ(tn+1 ), we make a second approximation
by replacing φ(tn ) by its approximate value yn in Eq. (11). This gives the Euler formula
yn+1 = yn + hf (tn , yn ). A more accurate algorithm can be obtained by approximating
the integral more accurately. This is discussed in Section 8.2.
                                  y'
                                                  y' = f [t, φ (t)]
                      f [tn, φ (tn)]
                                             tn                 tn+1                    t
                    FIGURE 8.1.1          Integral derivation of the Euler method.
   Another approach is to assume that the solution y = φ(t) has a Taylor series about
the point tn . Then
                                                                            h2
                          φ(tn + h) = φ(tn ) + φ (tn )h + φ (tn )           + ···,
                                                                            2!
or
                                                                              h2
                       φ(tn+1 ) = φ(tn ) + f [tn , φ(tn )]h + φ (tn )           + ···.  (12)
                                                                              2!
If the series is terminated after the first two terms, and φ(tn+1 ) and φ(tn ) are replaced
by their approximate values yn+1 and yn , we again obtain the Euler formula (6). If
more terms in the series are retained, a more accurate formula is obtained. Further,
by using a Taylor series with a remainder, it is possible to estimate the magnitude of
the error in the formula. This is discussed later in this section.
        The Backward Euler Formula. A variation on the Euler formula can be obtained by
        using the backward difference quotient [φ(tn ) − φ(tn−1 )]/h to approximate the deri-
        vative in Eq. (3) instead of the forward difference quotient used in Eq. (4). In this
        way we obtain
                                           φ(tn ) − φ(tn−1 ) ∼
                                                             = hf (tn , yn ),
        or
                                              yn = yn−1 + hf (tn , yn ).
        Stepping the index up from n to n + 1, we obtain the backward Euler formula
                                           yn+1 = yn + hf (tn+1 , yn+1 ).                             (13)
        Assuming that yn is known and yn+1 is to be calculated, observe that Eq. (13) does not
        provide an explicit formula for yn+1 . Rather, it is an equation that implicitly defines
        yn+1 and must be solved to determine the value of yn+1 . How difficult this is depends
        entirely on the nature of the function f .
        Use the backward Euler formula (13) and step sizes h = 0.05, 0.025, 0.01, and 0.001 to find
EXAMPLE approximate values of the solution of the initial value problem (7), (8) on the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 2.
   2       For this problem, the backward Euler formula (13) becomes
                                          yn+1 = yn + h(1 − tn+1 + 4yn+1 ).
        We will show the first two steps in detail so that it will be clear how the method works. At the
        first step we have
                             y1 = y0 + h(1 − t1 + 4y1 ) = 1 + (0.05)(1 − 0.05 + 4y1 ).
        Solving this equation for y1 , we obtain
                                            y1 = 1.0475/0.8 = 1.309375.
        Observe that because the differential equation is linear, the implicit equation for y1 is also
        linear and therefore easy to solve. Next,
                         y2 = y1 + h(1 − t2 + 4y2 ) = 1.309375 + (0.05)(1 − 0.1 + 4y2 ),
        which leads to
                                         y2 = 1.354375/0.8 = 1.69296875.
           Continuing the computations on a computer, we obtain the results shown in Table 8.1.2.
        The values given by the backward Euler method are uniformly too large for this problem,
        TABLE 8.1.2 A Comparison of Results for the Numerical Approximation of the Solution of
        y = 1 − t + 4y, y(0) = 1 Using the Backward Euler Method for Different Step Sizes h
         t         h = 0.05            h = 0.025           h = 0.01             h = 0.001        Exact
        0           1.0000000           1.0000000           1.0000000            1.0000000       1.0000000
        0.1         1.6929688           1.6474375           1.6236638            1.6104634       1.6090418
        0.2         2.7616699           2.6211306           2.5491368            2.5095731       2.5053299
        0.3         4.4174530           4.0920886           3.9285724            3.8396379       3.8301388
        0.4         6.9905516           6.3209569           5.9908303            5.8131282       5.7942260
        0.5       10.996956             9.7050002           9.0801473            8.7472667       8.7120041
        1.0      103.06171             80.402761          70.452395             65.419964      64.897803
        1.5      959.44236           661.00731           542.12432             485.05825      479.25919
        2.0     8934.0696           5435.7294           4172.7228             3597.4478      3540.2001
whereas the values obtained from the Euler method were too small. In this problem the errors
are somewhat larger for the backward Euler method than for the Euler method, although for
small values of h the differences are insignificant. Since the backward Euler method appears
to be no more accurate than the Euler method, and is somewhat more complicated, a natural
question is why it should even be mentioned. The answer is that it is the simplest example of a
class of methods known as backward differentiation formulas that are very useful for certain
types of differential equations. We will return to this issue later in this chapter.
Errors in Numerical Approximations. The use of a numerical procedure, such as the Euler
formula, on an initial value problem raises a number of questions that must be
answered before the approximate numerical solution can be accepted as satisfac-
tory. One of these is the question of convergence. That is, as the step size h tends
to zero, do the values of the numerical approximation y1 , y2 , . . . , yn , . . . approach the
corresponding values of the actual solution? If we assume that the answer is affir-
mative, there remains the important practical question of how rapidly the numerical
approximation converges to the solution. In other words, how small a step size is
needed in order to guarantee a given level of accuracy? We want to use a step size
that is small enough to ensure the required accuracy, but not too small. An unneces-
sarily small step size slows down the calculations and in some cases may even cause
a loss of accuracy.
   There are three fundamental sources of error in approximating the solution of an
initial value problem numerically.
1. The formula, or algorithm, used in the calculations is an approximate one. For instance,
    the Euler formula uses straight-line approximations to the actual solution.
2. Except for the first step, the input data used in the calculations are only approximations
    to the actual values of the solution at the specified points.
3. The computer used for the calculations has finite precision; in other words, at each stage
    only a finite number of digits can be retained.
   Let us temporarily assume that our computer can execute all computations exactly;
that is, it can retain infinitely many digits (if necessary) at each step. Then the dif-
ference En between the solution y = φ(t) of the initial value problem (1), (2) and its
numerical approximation yn at the point t = tn is given by
                                       En = φ(tn ) − yn .                                  (14)
The error En is known as the global truncation error. It arises entirely from the
first two error sources listed above—that is, by applying an approximate formula to
approximate data.
   However, in reality we must carry out the computations using finite precision
arithmetic, which means that we can keep only a finite number of digits at each step.
This leads to a round-off error Rn defined by
                                         Rn = yn − Yn ,                                    (15)
where Yn is the value actually computed from the given numerical method.
   The absolute value of the total error in computing φ(tn ) is given by
                           |φ(tn ) − Yn | = |φ(tn ) − yn + yn − Yn |.                      (16)
Making use of the triangle inequality, |a + b| ≤ |a| + |b|, we obtain, from Eq. (16),
                               |φ(tn ) − Yn | ≤ |φ(tn ) − yn | + |yn − Yn |
                                                ≤ |En | + |Rn |.                        (17)
Thus the total error is bounded by the sum of the absolute values of the global
truncation and round-off errors. For the numerical procedures discussed in this book,
it is possible to obtain useful estimates of the global truncation error. The round-off
error is more difficult to analyze, since it depends on the type of computer used, the
sequence in which the computations are carried out, the method of rounding off, and
so forth. A careful examination of round-off error is beyond the scope of this book,
but see, for example, the book by Henrici listed in the references. Some of the dangers
from round-off error are discussed in Problems 25 through 27 and in Section 8.6.
    It is often useful to consider separately the part of the global truncation error that
is due only to the use of an approximate formula. We can do this by assuming at the
nth step that the input data are accurate—that is, that yn = φ(tn ). This error is known
as the local truncation error; we will denote it by en .
Local Truncation Error for the Euler Method. Let us assume that the solution y = φ(t) of
the initial value problem (1), (2) has a continuous second derivative in the interval
of interest. To ensure this, we can assume that f , ft , and fy are continuous. For if f has
these properties and if φ is a solution of the initial value problem (1), (2), then
                                             φ (t) = f [t, φ(t)],
and, by the chain rule,
                               φ (t) = ft [t, φ(t)] + fy [t, φ(t)]φ (t)
                                       = ft [t, φ(t)] + fy [t, φ(t)]f [t, φ(t)].        (18)
Since the right side of this equation is continuous, φ is also continuous.
   Then, making use of a Taylor polynomial with a remainder to expand φ about tn ,
we obtain
                              φ(tn + h) = φ(tn ) + φ (tn )h + 21 φ (t n )h2 ,        (19)
where t n is some point in tn < t n < tn + h. Then, noting that φ(tn + h) = φ(tn+1 ) and
φ (tn ) = f [tn , φ(tn )], we can rewrite Eq. (19) as
                             φ(tn+1 ) = φ(tn ) + hf [tn , φ(tn )] + 21 φ (t n )h2 .   (20)
Now let us use the Euler formula to calculate an approximation to φ(tn+1 ) under
the assumption that we know the correct value for yn at tn , namely yn = φ(tn ). The
result is
                                      y∗n+1 = φ(tn ) + hf [tn , φ(tn )],                (21)
where the asterisk is used to designate this hypothetical approximate value for
φ(tn+1 ). The difference between φ(tn+1 ) and y∗n+1 is the local truncation error for the
(n + 1)st step in the Euler method, which we will denote by en+1 . Thus, by subtracting
Eq. (21) from Eq. (20), we find that
                                 en+1 = φ(tn+1 ) − y∗n+1 = 21 φ (t n )h2 ,            (22)
since the remaining terms in Eqs. (20) and (21) cancel.
   Thus the local truncation error for the Euler method is proportional to the square of
the step size h, and the proportionality factor depends on the second derivative of the
solution φ. The expression given by Eq. (22) depends on n and, in general, is different
for each step. A uniform bound, valid on an interval [a, b], is given by
                                       |en | ≤ Mh2 /2,                                  (23)
where M is the maximum of |φ (t)| on the interval [a, b]. Since Eq. (23) is based
on a consideration of the worst possible case—that is, the largest possible value of
|φ (t)|—it may well be a considerable overestimate of the actual local truncation
error in some parts of the interval [a, b].
   One use of Eq. (23) is to choose a step size that will result in a local truncation error
no greater than some given tolerance level. For example, if the local truncation
error must be no greater than , then from Eq. (23) we have
                                                         
                              Mh2 /2 ≤  or h ≤ 2/M.                                   (24)
The primary difficulty in using Eq. (22), (23), or (24) lies in estimating |φ (t)| or M.
However, the central fact expressed by these equations is that the local truncation
error is proportional to h2 . For example, if a new value of h is used that is one-half of
its original value, then the resulting error will be reduced to one-fourth of its previous
value.
   More important than the local truncation error is the global truncation error En .
The analysis for estimating En is much more difficult than that for en . Nevertheless,
it can be shown that the global truncation error in using the Euler method on a finite
interval is no greater than a constant times h. Thus
                                          |En | ≤ Kh                                    (25)
for some constant K; see Problem 23 for more details. The Euler method is called
a first order method because its global truncation error is proportional to the first
power of the step size.
   Because it is more accessible, we will hereafter use the local truncation error as our
principal measure of the accuracy of a numerical method and for comparing different
methods. If we have a priori information about the solution of the given initial value
problem, we can use the result (22) to obtain more precise information about how the
local truncation error varies with t. As an example, consider the illustrative problem
                               y = 1 − t + 4y,        y(0) = 1                         (26)
on the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 2. Let y = φ(t) be the solution of the initial value problem
(26). Then, as noted previously,
                                 φ(t) = (4t − 3 + 19e4t )/16
and therefore
                                       φ (t) = 19e4t .
Equation (22) then states that
                                  19e4t n h2
                          en+1 =             ,    tn < t n < tn + h.                    (27)
                                      2
The appearance of the factor 19 and the rapid growth of e4t explain why the results
in Table 8.1.1 are not very accurate.
   For instance, for h = 0.05 the error in the first step is
                                        19e4t 0 (0.0025)
                   e1 = φ(t1 ) − y1 =                    ,     0 < t 0 < 0.05.
                                                 2
It is clear that e1 is positive, and since e4t 0 < e0.2 , we have
                                      19e0.2 (0.0025) ∼
                               e1 ≤                    = 0.02901.                    (28)
                                              2
Note also that e4t 0 > 1; hence e1 > 19(0.0025)/2 = 0.02375. The actual error is
0.02542. It follows from Eq. (27) that the error becomes progressively worse
with increasing t; this is also clearly shown by the results in Table 8.1.1. Similar
computations for bounds for the local truncation error give
                            19e3.8 (0.0025)            19e4 (0.0025) ∼
                1.0617 ∼ =                     ≤ e20 ≤                 = 1.2967      (29)
                                    2                         2
in going from 0.95 to 1.0 and
                            19e7.8 (0.0025)            19e8 (0.0025) ∼
                  57.96 ∼=                     ≤ e40 ≤                 = 70.80       (30)
                                    2                         2
in going from 1.95 to 2.0.
   These results indicate that for this problem, the local truncation error is about 2500
times larger near t = 2 than near t = 0. Thus, to reduce the local truncation error to
an acceptable level throughout 0 ≤ t ≤ 2, we must choose a step size h based on an
analysis near t = 2. Of course, this step size will be much smaller than necessary near
t = 0. For example, to achieve a local truncation error of 0.01 for this problem, we
need a step size of about 0.00059 near t = 2 and a step size of about 0.032 near t = 0.
The use of a uniform step size that is smaller than necessary over much of the interval
results in more calculations than necessary, more time consumed, and possibly more
danger of unacceptable round-off errors.
   Another approach is to keep the local truncation error approximately constant
throughout the interval by gradually reducing the step size as t increases. In the
example problem, we would need to reduce h by a factor of about 50 in going from
t = 0 to t = 2. A method that provides for variations in the step size is called adaptive.
All modern computer codes for solving differential equations have the capability of
adjusting the step size as needed. We will return to this question in the next section.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, find approximate values of the solution of the given initial
         value problem at t = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4.
         (a) Use the Euler method with h = 0.05.
         (b) Use the Euler method with h = 0.025.
         (c) Use the backward Euler method with h = 0.05.
         (d) Use the backward Euler method with h = 0.025.
                                                                                √
          1. y = 3 + t − y,          y(0) = 1                   2. y = 5t − 3 y,           y(0) = 2
          3. y = 2y − 3t,         y(0) = 1                      4. y = 2t + e−ty ,        y(0) = 1
                    y + 2ty
                     2
          5. y =            ,       y(0) = 0.5                  6. y = (t 2 − y2 ) sin y,      y(0) = −1
                     3 + t2
         In each of Problems 7 through 12, find approximate values of the solution of the given initial
         value problem at t = 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0.
         (a) Use the Euler method with h = 0.025.
         (b) Use the Euler method with h = 0.0125.
         (c) Use the backward Euler method with h = 0.025.
         (d) Use the backward Euler method with h = 0.0125.
                                                                                √
          7. y = 0.5 − t + 2y,          y(0) = 1                8. y = 5t − 3 y,           y(0) = 2
                   √                                                          −ty
          9. y = t + y,            y(0) = 3                    10. y = 2t + e ,             y(0) = 1
         11. y = (4 − ty)/(1 + y2 ),         y(0) = −2
         12. y = (y2 + 2ty)/(3 + t 2 ),        y(0) = 0.5
         13. Complete the calculations leading to the entries in columns three and four of Table 8.1.1.
         14. Complete the calculations leading to the entries in columns three and four of Table 8.1.2.
         15. Using three terms in the Taylor series given in Eq. (12) and taking h = 0.1, determine
              approximate values of the solution of the illustrative example y = 1 − t + 4y, y(0) = 1 at
              t = 0.1 and 0.2. Compare the results with those using the Euler method and with the exact
              values.
              Hint: If y = f (t, y), what is y ?
         In each of Problems 16 and 17, estimate the local truncation error for the Euler method in
         terms of the solution y = φ(t). Obtain a bound for en+1 in terms of t and φ(t) that is valid on
         the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. By using a formula for the solution, obtain a more accurate error bound
         for en+1 . For h = 0.1 compute a bound for e1 and compare it with the actual error at t = 0.1.
         Also compute a bound for the error e4 in the fourth step.
         16. y = 2y − 1,         y(0) = 1                     17. y = 21 − t + 2y,          y(0) = 1
         In each of Problems 18 through 21, obtain a formula for the local truncation error for the Euler
         method in terms of t and the solution φ.
                                                                                √
         18. y = t 2 + y2 ,       y(0) = 1                    19. y = 5t − 3 y,            y(0) = 2
                    √
         20. y = t + y,           y(1) = 3                    21. y = 2t + e−ty ,         y(0) = 1
         22. Consider the initial value problem
                                                    y = cos 5πt,      y(0) = 1.
    (a) Determine the solution y = φ(t), and draw a graph of y = φ(t) for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1.
    (b) Determine approximate values of φ(t) at t = 0.2, 0.4, and 0.6 using the Euler method
    with h = 0.2. Draw a broken-line graph for the approximate solution, and compare it with
    the graph of the exact solution.
    (c) Repeat the computation of part (b) for 0 ≤ t ≤ 0.4, but take h = 0.1.
    (d) Show by computing the local truncation error that neither of these step sizes is suffi-
    ciently small. Determine a value of h to ensure that the local truncation error is less than
    0.05 throughout the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. That such a small value of h is required results from
    the fact that max |φ (t)| is large.
23. In this problem we discuss the global truncation error associated with the Euler method
    for the initial value problem y = f (t, y), y(t0 ) = y0 . Assuming that the functions f and fy
    are continuous in a closed, bounded region R of the ty-plane that includes the point (t0 , y0 ),
    it can be shown that there exists a constant L such that |f (t, y) − f (t, ỹ| < L|y − ỹ|, where
    (t, y) and (t, ỹ) are any two points in R with the same t coordinate (see Problem 15 of
    Section 2.8). Further, we assume that ft is continuous, so the solution φ has a continuous
    second derivative.
    (a) Using Eq. (20), show that
                |En+1 | ≤ |En | + h|f [tn , φ(tn )] − f (tn , yn )| + 21 h2 |φ (t n )| ≤ α|En | + βh2 ,  (i)
                                             
    where α = 1 + hL and β = max |φ (t)|/2 on t0 ≤ t ≤ tn .
    (b) Assume that if E0 = 0, and if |En | satisfies Eq. (i), then |En | ≤ βh2 (αn − 1)/(α − 1)
    for α = 1. Use this result to show that
                                                     (1 + hL)n − 1
                                           |En | ≤                      βh.                               (ii)
                                                             L
    Equation (ii) gives a bound for |En | in terms of h, L, n, and β. Notice that for a fixed h, this
    error bound increases with increasing n; that is, the error bound increases with distance
    from the starting point t0 .
    (c) Show that (1 + hL)n ≤ enhL ; hence
                                                        enhL − 1
                                               |En | ≤              βh.
                                                             L
    If we select an ending point T greater than t0 and then choose the step size h so that n
    steps are required to traverse the interval [t0 , T], then nh = T − t0 , and
                                                  e(T−t0 )L − 1
                                       |En | ≤                    βh = Kh,
                                                        L
    which is Eq. (25). Note that K depends on the length T − t0 of the interval and on the
    constants L and β that are determined from the function f .
24. Derive an expression analogous to Eq. (22) for the local truncation error for the backward
    Euler formula.
    Hint: Construct a suitable Taylor approximation to φ(t) about t = tn+1 .
25. Using a step size h = 0.05 and the Euler method, but retaining only three digits throughout
    the computations, determine approximate values of the solution at t = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and
    0.4 for each of the following initial value problems:
    (a) y = 1 − t + 4y,         y(0) = 1
    (b) y = 3 + t − y,        y(0) = 1
           
    (c) y = 2y − 3t,         y(0) = 1
                   Compare the results with those obtained in Example 1 and in Problems 1 and 3. The
                   small differences between some of those results rounded to three digits and the present
                   results are due to round-off error. The round-off error would become important if the
                   computation required many steps.
              26. The following problem illustrates a danger that occurs because of round-off error when
                   nearly equal numbers are subtracted and the difference is then multiplied by a large
                   number. Evaluate the quantity
                                                                                    
                                                                  6.010     18.04 
                                                          1000 · 
                                                                    2.004      6.000
                   in the following ways:
                   (a) First round each entry in the determinant to two digits.
                   (b) First round each entry in the determinant to three digits.
                   (c) Retain all four digits. Compare this value with the results in parts (a) and (b).
              27. The distributive law a(b − c) = ab − ac does not hold, in general, if the products are
                   rounded off to a smaller number of digits. To show this in a specific case, take a = 0.22,
                   b = 3.19, and c = 2.17. After each multiplication, round off the last digit.
8.2 Improvements on the Euler Method
              Since for many problems the Euler method requires a very small step size to produce
              sufficiently accurate results, much effort has been devoted to the development of
              more efficient methods. In the next three sections, we will discuss some of these
              methods. Consider the initial value problem
                                                     y = f (t, y),        y(t0 ) = y0                   (1)
              and let y = φ(t) denote its solution. Recall from Eq. (10) of Section 8.1 that by
              integrating the given differential equation from tn to tn+1 , we obtain
                                                                       tn+1
                                               φ(tn+1 ) = φ(tn ) +            f [t, φ(t)] dt.            (2)
                                                                        tn
             The Euler formula
                                                        yn+1 = yn + hf (tn , yn )                        (3)
              is obtained by replacing f [t, φ(t)] in Eq. (2) by its approximate value f (tn , yn ) at the
              left endpoint of the interval of integration.
              Improved Euler Formula. A better approximate formula can be obtained if the
              integrand in Eq. (2) is approximated more accurately. One way to do this is to
              replace the integrand by the average of its values at the two endpoints, namely,
              {f [tn , φ(tn )] + f [tn+1 , φ(tn+1 )]}/2. This is equivalent to approximating the area under
              the curve in Figure 8.2.1 between t = tn and t = tn+1 by the area of the shaded
trapezoid. Further, we replace φ(tn ) and φ(tn+1 ) by their respective approximate
values yn and yn+1 . In this way we obtain, from Eq. (2),
                                                f (tn , yn ) + f (tn+1 , yn+1 )
                                yn+1 = yn +                                       h.               (4)
                                                               2
Since the unknown yn+1 appears as one of the arguments of f on the right side of
Eq. (4), this equation defines yn+1 implicitly rather than explicitly. Depending on
the nature of the function f , it may be fairly difficult to solve Eq. (4) for yn+1 . This
difficulty can be overcome by replacing yn+1 on the right side of Eq. (4) by the value
obtained using the Euler formula (3). Thus
                                       f (tn , yn ) + f [tn + h, yn + hf (tn , yn )]
                       yn+1 = yn +                                                          h
                                                                2
                                       fn + f (tn + h, yn + hfn )
                               = yn +                                    h,                        (5)
                                                        2
where tn+1 has been replaced by tn + h.
                                 y'                           y' = f [t, φ (t)]
                f [tn+1, φ (tn+1)]
                     f [tn, φ (tn)]                                    1
                                                                       2
                                                                         {f [tn, φ (tn)] +
                                                                             f [tn+1, φ (tn+1)]}
                                           tn                 tn+1                               t
                   FIGURE 8.2.1        Derivation of the improved Euler method.
   Equation (5) gives an explicit formula for computing yn+1 , the approximate value
of φ(tn+1 ), in terms of the data at tn . This formula is known as the improved Euler
formula or the Heun1 formula. The improved Euler formula is an example of a two-
stage method; that is, we first calculate yn + hfn from the Euler formula and then
use this result to calculate yn+1 from Eq. (5). The improved Euler formula (5) is an
improvement over the Euler formula (3) because the local truncation error in using
Eq. (5) is proportional to h3 , while for the Euler method it is proportional to h2 . This
error estimate for the improved Euler formula is established in Problem 14. It can also
be shown that for a finite interval, the global truncation error for the improved Euler
formula is bounded by a constant times h2 , so this method is a second order method.
Note that this greater accuracy is achieved at the expense of more computational
work, since it is now necessary to evaluate f (t, y) twice in order to go from tn to tn+1 .
1The formula is named for the German mathematician Karl Heun (1859–1929), who was a professor at
Technische Hochschule Karlsruhe.
           If f (t, y) depends only on t and not on y, then solving the differential equation
        y = f (t, y) reduces to integrating f (t). In this case the improved Euler formula (5)
        becomes
                                                           h
                                           yn+1 − yn = [f (tn ) + f (tn + h)],                       (6)
                                                           2
        which is just the trapezoid rule for numerical integration.
        Use the improved Euler formula (5) to calculate approximate values of the solution of the
EXAMPLE initial value problem
                                               y = 1 − t + 4y,      y(0) = 1.                       (7)
   1
           To make clear exactly what computations are required, we show a couple of steps in detail.
        For this problem f (t, y) = 1 − t + 4y; hence
                                                      fn = 1 − tn + 4yn
        and
                                    f (tn + h, yn + hfn ) = 1 − (tn + h) + 4(yn + hfn ).
        Further, t0 = 0, y0 = 1, and f0 = 1 − t0 + 4y0 = 5. If h = 0.025, then
                           f (t0 + h, y0 + hf0 ) = 1 − 0.025 + 4[1 + (0.025)(5)] = 5.475.
        Then, from Eq. (5),
                                     y1 = 1 + (0.5)(5 + 5.475)(0.025) = 1.1309375.                   (8)
           At the second step we must calculate
                                       f1 = 1 − 0.025 + 4(1.1309375) = 5.49875,
                              y1 + hf1 = 1.1309375 + (0.025)(5.49875) = 1.26840625,
        and
                              f (t2 , y1 + hf1 ) = 1 − 0.05 + 4(1.26840625) = 6.023625.
        Then, from Eq. (5),
                       y2 = 1.1309375 + (0.5)(5.49875 + 6.023625)(0.025) = 1.2749671875.             (9)
           Further results for 0 ≤ t ≤ 2 obtained by using the improved Euler method with h = 0.025
        and h = 0.01 are given inTable 8.2.1.To compare the results of the improved Euler method with
        those of the Euler method, note that the improved Euler method requires two evaluations of
        f at each step, while the Euler method requires only one. This is significant because typically,
        most of the computing time in each step is spent in evaluating f , so counting these evalua-
        tions is a reasonable way to estimate the total computing effort. Thus, for a given step size h,
        the improved Euler method requires twice as many evaluations of f as the Euler method.
        Alternatively, the improved Euler method for step size h requires the same number of eval-
        uations of f as the Euler method for step size h/2.
           By referring to Table 8.2.1, you can see that the improved Euler method with h = 0.025 gives
        much better results than the Euler method with h = 0.01. Note that to reach t = 2 with these
        step sizes, the improved Euler method requires 160 evaluations of f , while the Euler method
        requires 200. More noteworthy is that the improved Euler method with h = 0.025 is also
        slightly more accurate than the Euler method with h = 0.001 (2000 evaluations of f ). In other
        words, with something like one-twelfth of the computing effort, the improved Euler method
        yields results for this problem that are comparable to, or a bit better than, those generated by
        the Euler method. This illustrates that, compared to the Euler method, the improved Euler
        method is clearly more efficient, yielding substantially better results or requiring much less
        total computing effort, or both.
 TABLE 8.2.1 A Comparison of Results Using the Euler and Improved Euler Methods for
 the Initial Value Problem y = 1 − t + 4y, y(0) = 1
                        Euler                           Improved Euler
  t        h = 0.01            h = 0.001         h = 0.025         h = 0.01       Exact
 0           1.0000000           1.0000000         1.0000000        1.0000000     1.0000000
 0.1         1.5952901           1.6076289         1.6079462        1.6088585     1.6090418
 0.2         2.4644587           2.5011159         2.5020618        2.5047827     2.5053299
 0.3         3.7390345           3.8207130         3.8228282        3.8289146     3.8301388
 0.4         5.6137120           5.7754845         5.7796888        5.7917911     5.7942260
 0.5         8.3766865           8.6770692         8.6849039        8.7074637     8.7120041
 1.0       60.037126           64.382558         64.497931         64.830722     64.897803
 1.5      426.40818           473.55979         474.83402         478.51588     479.25919
 2.0     3029.3279          3484.1608          3496.6702         3532.8789     3540.2001
    The percentage errors at t = 2 for the improved Euler method are 1.23% for h = 0.025 and
0.21% for h = 0.01.
    A computer program for the Euler method can be readily modified to implement
the improved Euler method instead. All that is required is to replace Step 6 in the
algorithm in Section 8.1 by the following:
                                   The Improved Euler Method
                              Step 6.      k1 = f (t, y)
                                           k2 = f (t + h, y + h ∗ k1)
                                           y = y + (h/2) ∗ (k1 + k2)
                                           t =t+h
Variation of Step Size. In Section 8.1 we mentioned the possibility of adjusting the
step size as a calculation proceeds so as to maintain the local truncation error at
a more or less constant level. The goal is to use no more steps than necessary
and, at the same time, to keep some control over the accuracy of the approxi-
mation. Here we will describe how this can be done. First we choose the error
tolerance , which is the local truncation error that we are willing to accept. Sup-
pose that after n steps we have reached the point (tn , yn ). We choose a step size
h and calculate yn+1 . Next we need to estimate the error we have made in calcu-
lating yn+1 . Not knowing the actual solution, the best that we can do is to use a
more accurate method and repeat the calculation starting from (tn , yn ). For exam-
ple, if we used the Euler method for the original calculation, we might repeat it
with the improved Euler method. Then the difference between the two calculated
                              est
values is an estimate en+1         of the error in using the original method. If the esti-
mated error is different from the error tolerance , then we adjust the step size
and repeat the calculation. The key to making this adjustment efficiently is know-
ing how the local truncation error en+1 depends on the step size h. For the Euler
method,the local truncation error is proportional to h2 ,so to bring the estimated error
down (or√ up)      to the tolerance level , we must multiply the original step size by the
factor /en+1  est
                    .
            To illustrate this procedure, consider the example problem (7):
                                          y = 1 − t + 4y,       y(0) = 1.
         Suppose that we choose the error tolerance  to be 0.05. You can verify that after one
         step with h = 0.1, we obtain the values 1.5 and 1.595 from the Euler method and the
         improved Euler method, respectively. Thus the estimated error in using the Euler
         method is 0.095. Since this is larger thanthe tolerance level of 0.05, we need to adjust
         the step size downward by the factor 0.05/0.095 ∼            = 0.73. Rounding downward to
         be conservative, let us choose the adjusted step size h = 0.07. Then, from the Euler
         formula, we obtain
                                   y1 = 1 + (0.07)f (0, 1) = 1.35 ∼  = φ(0.07).
         Using the improved Euler method, we obtain y1 = 1.39655, so the estimated error in
         using the Euler formula is 0.04655, which is slightly less than the specified tolerance.
         The actual error, based on a comparison with the solution itself, is somewhat greater,
         namely, 0.05122.
            We can follow the same procedure at each step of the calculation, thereby keeping
         the local truncation error approximately constant throughout the entire numerical
         process. Modern adaptive codes for solving differential equations adjust the step
         size in very much this way as they proceed, although they usually use more accurate
         formulas than the Euler and improved Euler formulas. Consequently, they are able
         to achieve both efficiency and accuracy by using very small steps only where they
         are really needed.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, find approximate values of the solution of the given initial
         value problem at t = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4. Compare the results with those obtained by the
         Euler method and the backward Euler method in Section 8.1 and with the exact solution (if
         available).
         (a) Use the improved Euler method with h = 0.05.
         (b) Use the improved Euler method with h = 0.025.
         (c) Use the improved Euler method with h = 0.0125.
                                                                          √
          1. y = 3 + t − y,      y(0) = 1                 2. y = 5t − 3 y,           y(0) = 2
          3. y = 2y − 3t,      y(0) = 1                   4. y = 2t + e−ty ,        y(0) = 1
                   y + 2ty
                    2
          5. y =          ,      y(0) = 0.5               6. y = (t 2 − y2 ) sin y,      y(0) = −1
                    3 + t2
         In each of Problems 7 through 12, find approximate values of the solution of the given initial
         value problem at t = 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0.
         (a) Use the improved Euler method with h = 0.025.
         (b) Use the improved Euler method with h = 0.0125.
                                                                          √
          7. y = 0.5 − t + 2y,       y(0) = 1             8. y = 5t − 3 y,           y(0) = 2
                  √                                                     −ty
          9. y = t + y,         y(0) = 3                 10. y = 2t + e ,             y(0) = 1
         11. y = (4 − ty)/(1 + y2 ),      y(0) = −2
               
         12. y = (y + 2ty)/(3 + t ),
                     2              2
                                             y(0) = 0.5
         13. Complete the calculations leading to the entries in columns four and five of Table 8.2.1.
14. In this problem we establish that the local truncation error for the improved Euler for-
     mula is proportional to h3 . If we assume that the solution φ of the initial value problem
     y = f (t, y), y(t0 ) = y0 has derivatives that are continuous through the third order ( f has
     continuous second partial derivatives), then it follows that
                                                                   φ (tn ) 2 φ (t n ) 3
                             φ(tn + h) = φ(tn ) + φ (tn )h +               h +            h,
                                                                      2!              3!
     where tn < t n < tn + h. Assume that yn = φ(tn ).
     (a) Show that, for yn+1 as given by Eq. (5),
                   en+1 = φ(tn+1 ) − yn+1
                            φ (tn )h − {f [tn + h, yn + hf (tn , yn )] − f (tn , yn )}     φ (t n )h3
                         =                                                               h+                .       (i)
                                                        2!                                         3!
     (b) Making use of the facts that φ (t) = ft [t, φ(t)] + fy [t, φ(t)]φ (t) and that the Taylor
     approximation with a remainder for a function F(t, y) of two variables is
                       F(a + h, b + k) = F(a, b) + Ft (a, b)h + Fy (a, b)k
                                                                                            
                                                           1 2                              
                                                       +      (h Ftt + 2hkFty + k2 Fyy )
                                                           2!                                 x=ξ,y=η
     where ξ lies between a and a + h, and η lies between b and b + k, show that the first term
     on the right side of Eq. (i) is proportional to h3 plus higher order terms. This is the desired
     result.
     (c) Show that if f (t, y) is linear in t and y, then en+1 = φ (t n )h3 /6 for some t n with
     tn < t n < tn+1 .
     Hint: What are ftt , fty , and fyy ?
15. Consider the improved Euler method for solving the illustrative initial value problem
     y = 1 − t + 4y, y(0) = 1. Using the result of Problem 14(c) and the exact solution of the
     initial value problem, determine en+1 and a bound for the error at any step on 0 ≤ t ≤ 2.
     Compare this error with the one obtained in Eq. (27) of Section 8.1 using the Euler method.
    Also obtain a bound for e1 for h = 0.05, and compare it with Eq. (28) of Section 8.1.
In each of Problems 16 and 17, use the actual solution φ(t) to determine en+1 and a bound
for en+1 at any step on 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 for the improved Euler method for the given initial value
problem. Also obtain a bound for e1 for h = 0.1, and compare it with the similar estimate for
the Euler method and with the actual error for the improved Euler method.
16. y = 2y − 1,           y(0) = 1                        17. y = 0.5 − t + 2y,            y(0) = 1
In each of Problems 18 through 21, carry out one step of the Euler method and of the
improved Euler method, using the step size h = 0.1. Suppose that a local truncation error
no greater than 0.0025 is required. Estimate the step size that is needed for the Euler method
to satisfy this requirement at the first step.
                                                                              √
18. y = 0.5 − t + 2y,            y(0) = 1                 19. y = 5t − 3 y,             y(0) = 2
          √                                                     
20. y = t + y,             y(0) = 3                        21. y = (y + 2ty)/(3 + t 2 ),
                                                                          2
                                                                                                        y(0) = 0.5
22. The modified Euler formula for the initial value problem y = f (t, y), y(t0 ) = y0 is given by
                                     yn+1 = yn + hf [tn + 21 h, yn + 21 hf (tn , yn )].
     Following the procedure outlined in Problem 14, show that the local truncation error in
     the modified Euler formula is proportional to h3 .
              In each of Problems 23 through 26, use the modified Euler formula of Problem 22 with h = 0.05
              to compute approximate values of the solution of the given initial value problem at t = 0.1,
              0.2, 0.3, and 0.4. Compare the results with those obtained in Problems 1 through 4.
                                                                                      √
              23. y = 3 + t − y,         y(0) = 1                    24. y = 5t − 3 y,       y(0) = 2
              25. y = 2y − 3t,         y(0) = 1                      26. y = 2t + e−ty ,   y(0) = 1
              27. Show that the modified Euler formula of Problem 22 is identical to the improved Euler
                   formula of Eq. (5) for y = f (t, y) if f is linear in both t and y.
8.3 The Runge–Kutta Method
              In preceding sections we have introduced the Euler formula, the backward Euler
              formula, and the improved Euler formula as ways to approximate the solution of the
              initial value problem
                                                    y = f (t, y),        y(t0 ) = y0                              (1)
              numerically. The local truncation errors for these methods are proportional to h2 , h2 ,
              and h3 , respectively. The Euler and improved Euler methods belong to what is now
              called the Runge–Kutta2 class of methods.
                 In this section we discuss the method originally developed by Runge and Kutta.
              This method is now called the classic fourth order four-stage Runge–Kutta method,
              but it is often referred to simply as the Runge–Kutta method, and we will follow this
              practice for brevity. This method has a local truncation error that is proportional
              to h5 . Thus it is two orders of magnitude more accurate than the improved Euler
              method and three orders of magnitude better than the Euler method. It is relatively
              simple to use and is sufficiently accurate to handle many problems efficiently. This
              is especially true of adaptive Runge–Kutta methods, in which provision is made to
              vary the step size as needed. We return to this issue at the end of the section.
                 The Runge–Kutta formula involves a weighted average of values of f (t, y) at
              different points in the interval tn ≤ t ≤ tn+1 . It is given by
                                                           
                                                              kn1 + 2kn2 + 2kn3 + kn4
                                         yn+1 = yn + h                                       ,                     (2)
                                                                             6
              where
                                                  kn1 = f (tn , yn ),
                                                  kn2 = f (tn + 21 h, yn + 21 hkn1 ),
                                                                                                                   (3)
                                                  kn3 = f (tn + 21 h, yn + 21 hkn2 ),
                                                  kn4 = f (tn + h, yn + hkn3 ).
              2 Carl David Runge (1856–1927), a German mathematician and physicist, worked for many years in
              spectroscopy. The analysis of data led him to consider problems in numerical computation, and the Runge–
              Kutta method originated in his paper on the numerical solution of differential equations in 1895. The
              method was extended to systems of equations in 1901 by Martin Wilhelm Kutta (1867–1944). Kutta was
              a German mathematician and aerodynamicist who is also well known for his important contributions to
              classical airfoil theory.
The sum (kn1 + 2kn2 + 2kn3 + kn4 )/6 can be interpreted as an average slope. Note
that kn1 is the slope at the left end of the interval, kn2 is the slope at the midpoint
using the Euler formula to go from tn to tn + h/2, kn3 is a second approximation
to the slope at the midpoint, and kn4 is the slope at tn + h using the Euler formula
and the slope kn3 to go from tn to tn + h.
    Although in principle it is not difficult to show that Eq. (2) differs from the Taylor
expansion of the solution φ by terms that are proportional to h5 , the algebra is
rather lengthy.3 Thus we simply state without proof that the local truncation error
in using Eq. (2) is proportional to h5 and that for a finite interval the global trunca-
tion error is at most a constant times h4 . The earlier description of this method as a
fourth order four-stage method reflects the facts that the global truncation error is
of fourth order in the step size h and that there are four intermediate stages in the
calculation (the calculation of kn1 , . . . , kn4 ).
    Clearly the Runge–Kutta formula, Eqs. (2) and (3), is more complicated than any
of the formulas discussed previously. This is of relatively little significance, however,
since it is not hard to write a computer program to implement this method. Such a
program has the same structure as the algorithm for the Euler method outlined in
Section 8.1. To be specific, the lines in Step 6 in the Euler algorithm must be replaced
by the following:
                                      The Runge–Kutta Method
                    Step 6.       k1 = f (t, y)
                                  k2 = f (t + 0.5 ∗ h, y + 0.5 ∗ h ∗ k1)
                                  k3 = f (t + 0.5 ∗ h, y + 0.5 ∗ h ∗ k2)
                                  k4 = f (t + h, y + h ∗ k3)
                                  y = y + (h/6) ∗ (k1 + 2 ∗ k2 + 2 ∗ k3 + k4)
                                  t =t+h
    Note that if f does not depend on y, then
               kn1 = f (tn ),       kn2 = kn3 = f (tn + h/2),            kn4 = f (tn + h),  (4)
and Eq. (2) reduces to
                                       h
                       yn+1 − yn =       [f (tn ) + 4f (tn + h/2) + f (tn + h)].            (5)
                                       6
Equation (5) can be identified as Simpson’s4 rule for the approximate evaluation of
the integral of y = f (t). The fact that Simpson’s rule has an error proportional to h5
is consistent with the local truncation error in the Runge–Kutta formula.
3 See, for example, Chapter 3 of the book by Henrici listed in the references.
4 Simpson’s rule is named for Thomas Simpson (1710–1761), an English mathematician and textbook
author, who published it in 1743.
        Use the Runge–Kutta method to calculate approximate values of the solution y = φ(t) of the
EXAMPLE initial value problem
                                            y = 1 − t + 4y,      y(0) = 1.                            (6)
   1
           Taking h = 0.2, we have
                               k01 = f (0, 1) = 5;      hk01 = 1.0,
                               k02 = f (0 + 0.1, 1 + 0.5) = 6.9;      hk02 = 1.38,
                               k03 = f (0 + 0.1, 1 + 0.69) = 7.66;       hk03 = 1.532,
                               k04 = f (0 + 0.2, 1 + 1.532) = 10.928.
        Thus
                                               0.2
                                   y1 = 1 +        [5 + 2(6.9) + 2(7.66) + 10.928]
                                                6
                                      = 1 + 1.5016 = 2.5016.
            Further results using the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.2, h = 0.1, and h = 0.05 are given
        in Table 8.3.1. Note that the Runge–Kutta method yields a value at t = 2 that differs from the
        exact solution by only 0.122% if the step size is h = 0.1, and by only 0.00903% if h = 0.05.
        In the latter case, the error is less than one part in 10,000, and the calculated value at t = 2 is
        correct to four digits.
            For comparison, note that both the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.05 and the improved
        Euler method with h = 0.025 require 160 evaluations of f to reach t = 2. The improved Euler
        method yields a result at t = 2 that is in error by 1.23%. Although this error may be acceptable
        for some purposes, it is more than 135 times the error yielded by the Runge–Kutta method
        with comparable computing effort. Note also that the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.2, or
        40 evaluations of f , produces a value at t = 2 with an error of 1.40%, which is only slightly
        greater than the error in the improved Euler method with h = 0.025, or 160 evaluations of f .
        Thus we see again that a more accurate algorithm is more efficient; it produces better results
        with similar effort, or similar results with less effort.
         TABLE 8.3.1 A Comparison of Results for the Numerical Approximation of the Solution
         of the Initial Value Problem y = 1 − t + 4y, y(0) = 1
                    Improved
                      Euler                               Runge–Kutta                          Exact
          t         h = 0.025             h = 0.2            h = 0.1          h = 0.05
         0           1.0000000             1.0000000          1.0000000        1.0000000       1.0000000
         0.1         1.6079462                                1.6089333        1.6090338       1.6090418
         0.2         2.5020618            2.5016000           2.5050062        2.5053060       2.5053299
         0.3         3.8228282                                3.8294145        3.8300854       3.8301388
         0.4         5.7796888            5.7776358           5.7927853        5.7941197       5.7942260
         0.5         8.6849039                                8.7093175        8.7118060       8.7120041
         1.0        64.497931           64.441579           64.858107         64.894875       64.897803
         1.5       474.83402                               478.81928         479.22674       479.25919
         2.0     3496.6702           3490.5574            3535.8667         3539.8804      3540.2001
           The classic Runge–Kutta method suffers from the same shortcoming as other meth-
        ods with a fixed step size for problems in which the local truncation error varies
        widely over the interval of interest. That is, a step size that is small enough to achieve
         satisfactory accuracy in some parts of the interval may be much smaller than neces-
         sary in other parts of the interval. This has stimulated the development of adaptive
         Runge–Kutta methods that provide for modifying the step size automatically as the
         computation proceeds, so as to maintain the local truncation error near or below a
         specified tolerance level. As explained in Section 8.2, this requires the estimation of
         the local truncation error at each step. One way to do this is to repeat the compu-
         tation with a fifth order method—which has a local truncation error proportional
         to h6 —and then to use the difference between the two results as an estimate of the
         error. If this is done in a straightforward manner, then the use of the fifth order
         method requires at least five more evaluations of f at each step, in addition to those
         required originally by the fourth order method. However, if we make an appropriate
         choice of the intermediate points and the weighting coefficients in the expressions for
         kn1 , . . . , kn4 in a certain fourth order Runge–Kutta method, then these expressions
         can be used again, together with one additional stage, in a corresponding fifth order
         method. This results in a substantial gain in efficiency. It turns out that this can be
         done in more than one way.
            The first fourth and fifth order Runge–Kutta pair was developed by Erwin
         Fehlberg5 in the late 1960s and is now called the Runge–Kutta–Fehlberg, or RKF,6
         method. The popularity of the RKF method was considerably enhanced by the
         appearance in 1977 of its Fortran implementation RKF45 by Lawrence F. Shampine
         and H. A. Watts. The RKF method and other adaptive Runge–Kutta methods are very
         powerful and efficient means of approximating numerically the solutions of an enor-
         mous class of initial value problems. Specific implementations of one or more of them
         are widely available in commercial software packages.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, find approximate values of the solution of the given initial
         value problem at t = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4. Compare the results with those obtained by using
         other methods and with the exact solution (if available).
         (a) Use the Runge-Kutta method with h = 0.1.
         (b) Use the Runge-Kutta method with h = 0.05.
                                                                             √
           1. y = 3 + t − y,        y(0) = 1                 2. y = 5t − 3 y,           y(0) = 2
           3. y = 2y − 3t,        y(0) = 1                   4. y = 2t + e−ty ,        y(0) = 1
                       y + 2ty
                        2
           5. y =             ,    y(0) = 0.5                6. y = (t 2 − y2 ) sin y,      y(0) = −1
                        3 + t2
         In each of Problems 7 through 12, find approximate values of the solution of the given initial
         value problem at t = 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0. Compare the results with those obtained by other
         methods.
         (a) Use the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.1.
         (b) Use the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.05.
         5 Erwin Fehlberg (1911–1990) was born in Germany, received his doctorate from the Technical University
         of Berlin in 1942, emigrated to the United States after World War II, and was employed by NASA for
         many years. The Runge–Kutta–Fehlberg method was first published in a NASA Technical Report in 1969.
         6The details of the RKF method may be found, for example, in the books by Ascher and Petzold and by
         Mattheij and Molenaar that are listed in the references.
                                                                                           √
                7. y = 0.5 − t + 2y,           y(0) = 1                   8. y = 5t − 3 y,   y(0) = 2
                           √
                9. y = t + y,             y(0) = 3                     10. y = 2t + e−ty ,  y(0) = 1
               11. y = (4 − ty)/(1 + y2 ),          y(0) = −2
               12. y = (y2 + 2ty)/(3 + t 2 ),         y(0) = 0.5
               13. Confirm the results in Table 8.3.1 by executing the indicated computations.
               14. Consider the initial value problem
                                                          y  = t 2 + y2 ,       y(0) = 1.
                   (a) Draw a direction field for this equation.
                   (b) Use the Runge–Kutta method or another method to find approximate values of the
                   solution at t = 0.8, 0.9, and 0.95. Choose a small enough step size so that you believe your
                   results are accurate to at least four digits.
                   (c) Try to extend the calculations in part (b) to obtain an accurate approximation to the
                   solution at t = 1. If you encounter difficulties in doing this, explain why you think this
                   happens. The direction field in part (a) may be helpful.
               15. Consider the initial value problem
                                                      y = 3t 2 /(3y2 − 4),         y(0) = 0.
                   (a) Draw a direction field for this equation.
                   (b) Estimate how far the solution can be extended to the right. Let tM be the right endpoint
                   of the interval of existence of this solution. What happens at tM to prevent the solution
                   from continuing farther?
                   (c) Use the Runge–Kutta method with various step sizes to determine an approximate
                   value of tM .
                   (d) If you continue the computation beyond tM , you can continue to generate values of y.
                   What significance, if any, do these values have?
                   (e) Suppose that the initial condition is changed to y(0) = 1. Repeat parts (b) and (c) for
                   this problem.
8.4 Multistep Methods
               In previous sections we have discussed numerical procedures for approximating the
               solution of the initial value problem
                                                      y = f (t, y),         y(t0 ) = y0 ,                  (1)
               in which data at the point t = tn are used to calculate an approximate value of the
               solution φ(tn+1 ) at the next mesh point t = tn+1 . In other words, the calculated value
               of φ at any mesh point depends only on the data at the preceding mesh point. Such
               methods are called one-step methods. However, once approximate values of the
               solution y = φ(t) have been obtained at a few points beyond t0 , it is natural to ask
               whether we can make use of some of this information, rather than just the value at
               the last point, to calculate the value of φ(t) at the next point. Specifically, if y1 at t1 ,
               y2 at t2 , . . . , yn at tn are known, how can we use this information to determine yn+1 at
tn+1 ? Methods that use information at more than the last mesh point are referred to
as multistep methods. In this section we will describe two types of multistep methods:
Adams7 methods and backward differentiation methods. Within each type, we can
achieve various levels of accuracy, depending on the number of preceding data points
that are used. For simplicity, we will assume throughout our discussion that the step
size h is constant.
Adams Methods. Recall that
                                                          tn+1
                                   φ(tn+1 ) − φ(tn ) =           φ (t) dt,                          (2)
                                                          tn
where φ(t) is the solution of the initial value problem (1). The basic idea of an Adams
method is to approximate φ (t) by a polynomial Pk (t) of degree k and to use the
polynomial to evaluate the integral on the right side of Eq. (2). The coefficients in
Pk (t) are determined by using k + 1 previously calculated data points. For example,
suppose that we wish to use a first degree polynomial P1 (t) = At + B. Then we need
only the two data points (tn , yn ) and (tn−1 , yn−1 ). For P1 to be an approximation to
φ , we require that P1 (tn ) = f (tn , yn ) and that P1 (tn−1 ) = f (tn−1 , yn−1 ). Recall that we
denote f (tj , yj ) by fj for an integer j. Then A and B must satisfy the equations
                                             Atn + B = fn ,
                                                                                                     (3)
                                           Atn−1 + B = fn−1 .
Solving for A and B, we obtain
                                    fn − fn−1                fn−1 tn − fn tn−1
                             A=                ,        B=                     .                     (4)
                                        h                             h
Replacing φ (t) by P1 (t) and evaluating the integral in Eq. (2), we find that
                                                 A 2
                         φ(tn+1 ) − φ(tn ) =         (t  − tn2 ) + B(tn+1 − tn ).
                                                 2 n+1
Finally, we replace φ(tn+1 ) and φ(tn ) by yn+1 and yn , respectively, and carry out some
algebraic simplification. For a constant step size h, we obtain
                                     yn+1 = yn + 23 hfn − 21 hfn−1 .                                 (5)
Equation (5) is the second order Adams–Bashforth8 formula. It is an explicit formula
for yn+1 in terms of yn and yn−1 and has a local truncation error proportional to h3 .
    We note in passing that the first order Adams–Bashforth formula, based on the
polynomial P0 (t) = fn of degree zero, is just the original Euler formula.
7 John Couch Adams (1819–1892), an English mathematician and astronomer, is most famous as codiscov-
erer, with Joseph Leverrier, of the planet Neptune in 1846. He was associated with Cambridge University
for most of his life, as student (1839–1843), fellow, Lowdean Professor, and director of the Observa-
tory. Adams was extremely skilled at computation; his procedure for numerical integration of differential
equations appeared in 1883 in a book with Francis Bashforth on capillary action.
8 Francis Bashforth (1819–1912), English mathematician and Anglican priest, was a classmate of J. C.
Adams at Cambridge. He was particularly interested in ballistics and invented the Bashforth chronograph
for measuring the velocity of artillery projectiles.
   More accurate Adams formulas can be obtained by following the procedure out-
lined above, but using a higher degree polynomial and correspondingly more data
points. For example, suppose that a polynomial P3 (t) of degree three is used. The
coefficients are determined from the four points (tn , yn ), (tn−1 , yn−1 ), (tn−2 , yn−2 ), and
(tn−3 , yn−3 ). Substituting this polynomial for φ (t) in Eq. (2), evaluating the integral,
and simplifying the result, we eventually obtain the fourth order Adams–Bashforth
formula
                       yn+1 = yn + (h/24)(55fn − 59fn−1 + 37fn−2 − 9fn−3 ).                     (6)
The local truncation error of this fourth order formula is proportional to h5 .
   A variation on the derivation of the Adams–Bashforth formulas gives another set
of formulas called the Adams–Moulton9 formulas. To see the difference, let us again
consider the second order case.Again we use a first degree polynomial Q1 (t) = αt + β,
but we determine the coefficients by using the points (tn , yn ) and (tn+1 , yn+1 ). Thus α
and β must satisfy
                                                αtn + β = fn ,
                                                                                                (7)
                                            αtn+1 + β = fn+1 ,
and it follows that
                                     fn+1 − fn             fn tn+1 − fn+1 tn
                              α=                ,     β=                     .                  (8)
                                         h                         h
Substituting Q1 (t) for φ (t) in Eq. (2) and simplifying, we obtain
                                 yn+1 = yn + 21 hfn + 21 hf (tn+1 , yn+1 ),                     (9)
which is the second order Adams–Moulton formula. We have written f (tn+1 , yn+1 )
in the last term to emphasize that the Adams–Moulton formula is implicit, rather
than explicit, since the unknown yn+1 appears on both sides of the equation. The
local truncation error for the second order Adams–Moulton formula is proportional
to h3 .
   The first order Adams–Moulton formula is just the backward Euler formula, as
you might anticipate by analogy with the first order Adams–Bashforth formula.
   More accurate higher order formulas can be obtained by using an approximating
polynomial of higher degree. The fourth order Adams–Moulton formula, with a local
truncation error proportional to h5 , is
                         yn+1 = yn + (h/24)(9fn+1 + 19fn − 5fn−1 + fn−2 ).                     (10)
Observe that this is also an implicit formula, because yn+1 appears in fn+1 .
   Although both the Adams–Bashforth and Adams–Moulton formulas of the same
order have local truncation errors proportional to the same power of h, the Adams–
Moulton formulas of moderate order are in fact considerably more accurate.
For example, for the fourth order formulas (6) and (10), the proportionality constant
9 Forest Ray Moulton (1872–1952), an American astronomer and administrator of science, was for many
years professor of astronomy at the University of Chicago. During World War I, he was in charge of
the Ballistics Branch of the U.S. Army at Aberdeen (MD) Proving Ground. In the course of calculating
ballistics trajectories he devised substantial improvements in the Adams formula.
        for the Adams–Moulton formula is less than 1/10 of the proportionality constant
        for the Adams–Bashforth formula. Thus the question arises: is it better to use the
        explicit (and faster) Adams–Bashforth formula or the more accurate but implicit
        (and slower) Adams–Moulton formula? The answer depends on whether, by using
        the more accurate formula, you can increase the step size, and thereby reduce the
        number of steps enough to compensate for the additional computations required at
        each step.
           In fact, numerical analysts have attempted to achieve both simplicity and accuracy
        by combining the two formulas in what is called a predictor–corrector method. Once
        yn−3 , yn−2 , yn−1 , and yn are known, we can compute fn−3 , fn−2 , fn−1 , and fn , and then
        use the Adams–Bashforth (predictor) formula (6) to obtain a first value for yn+1 .
        Then we compute fn+1 and use the Adams–Moulton (corrector) formula (10), which
        is no longer implicit, to obtain an improved value of yn+1 . We can, of course, continue
        to use the corrector formula (10) if the change in yn+1 is too large. However, if it is
        necessary to use the corrector formula more than once or perhaps twice, it means
        that the step size h is too large and should be reduced.
           In order to use any of the multistep methods, it is necessary first to calculate a few
        yj by some other method. For example, the fourth order Adams–Moulton method
        requires values for y1 and y2 , while the fourth order Adams–Bashforth method also
        requires a value for y3 . One way to proceed is to use a one-step method of comparable
        accuracy to calculate the necessary starting values. Thus, for a fourth order multistep
        method, we might use the fourth order Runge–Kutta method to calculate the starting
        values. This is the method used in the next example.
           Another approach is to use a low order method with a very small h to calculate y1 ,
        and then to increase gradually both the order and the step size until enough starting
        values have been determined.
        Consider again the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                          y = 1 − t + 4y,       y(0) = 1.                         (11)
   1
        With a step size of h = 0.1, determine an approximate value of the solution y = φ(t) at t = 0.4
        using the fourth order Adams–Bashforth formula, the fourth order Adams–Moulton formula,
        and the predictor–corrector method.
           For starting data, we use the values of y1 , y2 , and y3 found by the Runge–Kutta method.
        These are tabulated in Table 8.3.1. Next, calculating the corresponding values of f (t, y), we
        obtain
                                      y0 = 1,                 f0 = 5,
                                      y1 = 1.6089333,         f1 = 7.3357332,
                                      y2 = 2.5050062,         f2 = 10.820025,
                                      y3 = 3.8294145,         f3 = 16.017658.
        Then, from the Adams–Bashforth formula, Eq. (6), we find that y4 = 5.7836305. The exact
        value of the solution at t = 0.4, correct through eight digits, is 5.7942260, so the error is
        −0.0105955.
           The Adams–Moulton formula, Eq. (10), leads to the equation
                                             y4 = 4.9251275 + 0.15y4 ,
        from which it follows that y4 = 5.7942676 with an error of only 0.0000416.
    Finally, using the result from the Adams–Bashforth formula as a predicted value of φ(0.4),
we can then use Eq. (10) as a corrector. Corresponding to the predicted value of y4 , we find
that f4 = 23.734522. Hence, from Eq. (10), the corrected value of y4 is 5.7926721. This result is
in error by −0.0015539.
    Observe that the Adams–Bashforth method is the simplest and fastest of these methods,
since it involves only the evaluation of a single explicit formula. It is also the least accurate.
Using the Adams–Moulton formula as a corrector increases the amount of calculation that
is required, but the method is still explicit. In this problem the error in the corrected value
of y4 is reduced by approximately a factor of 7 when compared to the error in the predicted
value. The Adams–Moulton method alone yields by far the best result, with an error that is
about 1/40 as large as the error from the predictor–corrector method. Remember, however,
that the Adams–Moulton method is implicit, which means that an equation must be solved
at each step. In the problem considered here this equation is linear, so the solution is quickly
found, but in other problems this part of the procedure may be much more time-consuming.
    The Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.1 gives y4 = 5.7927853 with an error of −0.0014407;
see Table 8.3.1. Thus, for this problem, the Runge–Kutta method is comparable in accuracy to
the predictor–corrector method.
Backward Differentiation Formulas. Another type of multistep method uses a polynomial
Pk (t) to approximate the solution φ(t) of the initial value problem (1) rather than
its derivative φ (t), as in the Adams methods. We then differentiate Pk (t) and set
Pk (tn+1 ) equal to f (tn+1 , yn+1 ) to obtain an implicit formula for yn+1 . These are called
backward differentiation formulas. These methods became widely used in the 1970s
because of the work of C. William Gear10 on so-called stiff differential equations,
whose solutions are very difficult to approximate by the methods discussed up to
now; see Section 8.6.
    The simplest case uses a first degree polynomial P1 (t) = At + B. The coefficients
are chosen to match the computed values of the solution yn and yn+1 . Thus A and B
must satisfy
                                               Atn + B = yn ,
                                                                                                     (12)
                                            Atn+1 + B = yn+1 .
Since P1 (t) = A, the requirement that
                                        P1 (tn+1 ) = f (tn+1 , yn+1 )
is just
                                            A = f (tn+1 , yn+1 ).                                    (13)
Another expression for A comes from subtracting the first of Eqs. (12) from the
second, which gives
                                           A = (yn+1 − yn )/h.
10 C. William Gear (1935– ), born in London, England, received his undergraduate education at Cambridge
University and his doctorate in 1960 from the University of Illinois. He was a member of the faculty at the
University of Illinois for most of his career and made significant contributions to both computer design
and numerical analysis. His influential book on numerical methods for differential equations is listed in
the references.
        Substituting this value of A into Eq. (13) and rearranging terms, we obtain the first
        order backward differentiation formula
                                           yn+1 = yn + hf (tn+1 , yn+1 ).                            (14)
        Note that Eq. (14) is just the backward Euler formula that we first saw in Section 8.1.
            By using higher order polynomials and correspondingly more data points, we can
        obtain backward differentiation formulas of any order. The second order formula is
                                   yn+1 = 13 [4yn − yn−1 + 2hf (tn+1 , yn+1 )] ,                     (15)
        and the fourth order formula is
                      yn+1 = 251
                                 [48yn − 36yn−1 + 16yn−2 − 3yn−3 + 12hf (tn+1 , yn+1 )] .            (16)
        These formulas have local truncation errors proportional to h3 and h5 , respectively.
        Use the fourth order backward differentiation formula with h = 0.1 and the data given in
EXAMPLE Example 1 to determine an approximate value of the solution y = φ(t) at t = 0.4 for the initial
   2    value problem (11).
            Using Eq. (16) with n = 3, h = 0.1, and with y0 , . . . , y3 given in Example 1, we obtain the
        equation
                                            y4 = 4.6837842 + 0.192y4 .
        Thus
                                                  y4 = 5.7967626.
        Comparing the calculated value with the exact value φ(0.4) = 5.7942260, we find that the error
        is 0.0025366. This is somewhat better than the result using the Adams–Bashforth method, but
        it is not as good as the result using the predictor–corrector method, and not nearly as good as
        the result using the Adams–Moulton method.
            A comparison between one-step and multistep methods must take several factors
        into consideration. The fourth order Runge–Kutta method requires four evaluations
        of f at each step, while the fourth order Adams–Bashforth method (once past the
        starting values) requires only one, and the predictor–corrector method only two.
        Thus, for a given step size h, the latter two methods may well be considerably faster
        than Runge–Kutta. However, if Runge–Kutta is more accurate and therefore can use
        fewer steps, then the difference in speed will be reduced and perhaps eliminated. The
        Adams–Moulton and backward differentiation formulas also require that the diffi-
        culty in solving the implicit equation at each step be taken into account. All multistep
        methods have the possible disadvantage that errors in earlier steps can feed back into
        later calculations with unfavorable consequences. On the other hand, the underly-
        ing polynomial approximations in multistep methods make it easy to approximate
        the solution at points between the mesh points, should this be desirable. Multistep
        methods have become popular largely because it is relatively easy to estimate the
        error at each step and to adjust the order or the step size to control it. For a further
        discussion of such questions as these, see the books listed at the end of this chapter;
        in particular, Shampine (1994) is an authoritative source.
 PROBLEMS      In each of Problems 1 through 6, determine an approximate value of the solution at t = 0.4
               and t = 0.5 using the specified method. For starting values, use the values given by the Runge–
               Kutta method; see Problems 1 through 6 of Section 8.3. Compare the results of the various
               methods with each other and with the actual solution (if available).
               (a) Use the fourth order predictor–corrector method with h = 0.1. Use the corrector formula
               once at each step.
               (b) Use the fourth order Adams–Moulton method with h = 0.1.
               (c) Use the fourth order backward differentiation method with h = 0.1.
                                                                                 √
                 1. y = 3 + t − y,      y(0) = 1                 2. y = 5t − 3 y,           y(0) = 2
                 3. y = 2y − 3t,      y(0) = 1                   4. y = 2t + e−ty ,        y(0) = 1
                         y + 2ty
                           2
                 5. y =          ,      y(0) = 0.5               6. y = (t 2 − y2 ) sin y,      y(0) = −1
                           3 + t2
               In each of Problems 7 through 12, find approximate values of the solution of the given initial
               value problem at t = 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0, using the specified method. For starting values,
               use the values given by the Runge–Kutta method; see Problems 7 through 12 in Section 8.3.
               Compare the results of the various methods with each other and with the actual solution (if
               available).
               (a) Use the fourth order predictor–corrector method with h = 0.05. Use the corrector formula
               once at each step.
               (b) Use the fourth order Adams–Moulton method with h = 0.05.
               (c) Use the fourth order backward differentiation method with h = 0.05.
                                                                                 √
                 7. y = 0.5 − t + 2y,       y(0) = 1             8. y = 5t − 3 y,           y(0) = 2
                        √                                                      −ty
                 9. y = t + y,         y(0) = 3                  10. y = 2t + e ,            y(0) = 1
                11. y = (4 − ty)/(1 + y2 ),       y(0) = −2
                12. y = (y2 + 2ty)/(3 + t 2 ),      y(0) = 0.5
                13. Show that the first order Adams–Bashforth method is the Euler method and that the first
                    order Adams–Moulton method is the backward Euler method.
                14. Show that the third order Adams–Bashforth formula is
                                               yn+1 = yn + (h/12)(23fn − 16fn−1 + 5fn−2 ).
                15. Show that the third order Adams–Moulton formula is
                                                 yn+1 = yn + (h/12)(5fn+1 + 8fn − fn−1 ).
                16. Derive the second order backward differentiation formula given by Eq. (15) in this section.
8.5 Systems of First Order Equations
               In the preceding sections we discussed numerical methods for approximating the
               solution of an initial value problem associated with a first order differential equation.
               These methods can also be applied to a system of first order equations. Since a
               higher order equation can always be reduced to a system of first order equations,
it is sufficient to deal with systems of first order equations alone. For simplicity, we
consider a system of two first order equations
                                       x = f (t, x, y),    y = g(t, x, y),                    (1)
with the initial conditions
                                          x(t0 ) = x0 ,     y(t0 ) = y0 .                       (2)
The functions f and g are assumed to satisfy the conditions of Theorem 7.1.1 so that
the initial value problem (1), (2) has a unique solution in some interval of the t-axis
containing the point t0 . We wish to determine approximate values x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , . . .
and y1 , y2 , . . . , yn , . . . of the solution x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) at the points tn = t0 + nh with
n = 1, 2, . . . .
   In vector notation, the initial value problem (1), (2) can be written as
                                          x = f(t, x),     x(t0 ) = x0 ,                       (3)
where x is the vector with components x and y, f is the vector function with com-
ponents f and g, and x0 is the vector with components x0 and y0 . The methods of
the previous sections can be readily generalized to handle systems of two (or more)
equations. All that is needed (formally) is to replace the scalar variable x by the vec-
tor x and the scalar function f by the vector function f in the appropriate equations.
For example, the Euler formula becomes
                                                xn+1 = xn + hf n ,                              (4)
or, in component form,
                                                          
                                       xn+1         xn        f (tn , xn , yn )
                                              =          +h                     .               (5)
                                      yn+1          yn        g(tn , xn , yn )
The initial conditions are used to determine f 0 ,which is the vector tangent to the graph
of the solution x = φ(t) at the initial point x0 in the xy-plane. We move in the direc-
tion of this tangent vector for a time step h in order to find the next point x1 . Then
we calculate a new tangent vector f 1 at x1 , move along it for a time step h to find x2 ,
and so forth.
   In a similar way, the Runge–Kutta method can be extended to a system. For the
step from tn to tn+1 we have
                                xn+1 = xn + (h/6)(kn1 + 2kn2 + 2kn3 + kn4 ),                    (6)
where
                                     kn1 = f(tn , xn ),
                                     kn2 = f[tn + (h/2), xn + (h/2)kn1 ],
                                                                                                (7)
                                     kn3 = f[tn + (h/2), xn + (h/2)kn2 ],
                                     kn4 = f(tn + h, xn + hkn3 ).
   The formulas for the Adams–Moulton predictor–corrector method as it applies to
the initial value problem (1), (2) are given in Problem 9.
   The vector equations (3), (4), (6), and (7) are, in fact, valid in any number of
dimensions. All that is needed is to interpret the vectors as having n components
rather than two.
        Determine approximate values of the solution x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) of the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                           x = x − 4y,           y = −x + y,                         (8)
   1                                           x(0) = 1,           y(0) = 0,                           (9)
        at the point t = 0.2. Use the Euler method with h = 0.1 and the Runge–Kutta method with
        h = 0.2. Compare the results with the values of the exact solution:
                                               e−t + e3t                  e−t − e3t
                                      φ(t) =              ,       ψ(t) =              .               (10)
                                                    2                          4
           Let us first use the Euler method. For this problem, fn = xn − 4yn and gn = −xn + yn ; hence
                                   f0 = 1 − (4)(0) = 1,            g0 = −1 + 0 = −1.
        Then, from the Euler formulas (4) and (5), we obtain
                             x1 = 1 + (0.1)(1) = 1.1,           y1 = 0 + (0.1)(−1) = −0.1.
        At the next step,
                          f1 = 1.1 − (4)(−0.1) = 1.5,             g1 = −1.1 + (−0.1) = −1.2.
        Consequently,
                      x2 = 1.1 + (0.1)(1.5) = 1.25,            y2 = −0.1 + (0.1)(−1.2) = −0.22.
        The values of the exact solution, correct to eight digits, are φ(0.2) = 1.3204248 and
        ψ(0.2) = −0.25084701. Thus the values calculated from the Euler method are in error by
        about 0.0704 and 0.0308, respectively, corresponding to percentage errors of about 5.3% and
        12.3%.
           Now let us use the Runge–Kutta method to approximate φ(0.2) and ψ(0.2). With h = 0.2
        we obtain the following values from Eqs. (7):
                                                                      
                                                            f (1, 0)         1
                                                 k01 =                 =         ;
                                                            g(1, 0)        −1
                                                                              
                                                    f (1.1, −0.1)            1.5
                                          k02 =                        =            ;
                                                    g(1.1, −0.1)           −1.2
                                                                                
                                                 f (1.15, −0.12)             1.63
                                       k03 =                           =              ;
                                                 g(1.15, −0.12)            −1.27
                                                                                  
                                              f (1.326, −0.254)              2.342
                                     k04 =                             =                .
                                              g(1.326, −0.254)             −1.580
           Then, substituting these values in Eq. (6), we obtain
                                                                    
                                         1      0.2      9.602            1.3200667
                                 x1 =       +                       =                     .
                                         0       6 −7.52                −0.25066667
        These values of x1 and y1 are in error by about 0.000358 and 0.000180, respectively, with
        percentage errors much less than one-tenth of 1%.
           This example again illustrates the great gains in accuracy that are obtainable by using a more
        accurate approximation method, such as the Runge–Kutta method. In the calculations we have
        just outlined, the Runge–Kutta method requires only twice as many function evaluations as
        the Euler method, but the error in the Runge–Kutta method is about 200 times less than that
        in the Euler method.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, determine approximate values of the solution x = φ(t),
         y = ψ(t) of the given initial value problem at t = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0. Compare the results
         obtained by different methods and different step sizes.
         (a) Use the Euler method with h = 0.1.
         (b) Use the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.2.
         (c) Use the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.1.
          1. x = x + y + t,     y = 4x − 2y;         x(0) = 1,   y(0) = 0
          2. x = 2x + ty,     y = xy;        x(0) = 1,    y(0) = 1
          3. x = −tx − y − 1,      y = x;         x(0) = 1,  y(0) = 1
          4. x = x − y + xy,      y = 3x − 2y − xy;         x(0) = 0,     y(0) = 1
                                            
          5. x = x(1 − 0.5x − 0.5y),        y = y(−0.25 + 0.5x);           x(0) = 4,    y(0) = 1
                                                
          6. x = exp(−x + y) − cos x,          y = sin(x − 3y);         x(0) = 1,    y(0) = 2
                                                                     
          7. Consider the example problem x = x − 4y, y = −x + y with the initial conditions
             x(0) = 1 and y(0) = 0. Use the Runge–Kutta method to find approximate values of
             the solution of this problem on the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. Start with h = 0.2, and then
             repeat the calculation with step sizes h = 0.1, 0.05, . . . , each half as long as in the preceding
             case. Continue the process until the first five digits of the solution at t = 1 are unchanged
             for successive step sizes. Determine whether these digits are accurate by comparing them
             with the exact solution given in Eqs. (10) in the text.
          8. Consider the initial value problem
                                       x + t 2 x + 3x = t,     x(0) = 1,     x (0) = 2.
             Convert this problem to a system of two first order equations, and determine approximate
             values of the solution at t = 0.5 and t = 1.0 using the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.1.
          9. Consider the initial value problem x = f (t, x, y) and y = g(t, x, y) with x(t0 ) = x0 and
             y(t0 ) = y0 . The generalization of the Adams–Moulton predictor–corrector method of
             Section 8.4 is
                                     xn+1 = xn + 241 h(55fn − 59fn−1 + 37fn−2 − 9fn−3 ),
                                     yn+1 = yn + 241 h(55gn − 59gn−1 + 37gn−2 − 9gn−3 )
             and
                                      xn+1 = xn + 241 h(9fn+1 + 19fn − 5fn−1 + fn−2 ),
                                      yn+1 = yn + 241 h(9gn+1 + 19gn − 5gn−1 + gn−2 ).
             Determine an approximate value of the solution at t = 0.4 for the example initial value
             problem x = x − 4y, y = −x + y with x(0) = 1, y(0) = 0. Take h = 0.1. Correct the pre-
             dicted value once. For the values of x1 , . . . , y3 use the values of the exact solution rounded
             to six digits: x1 = 1.12735, x2 = 1.32042, x3 = 1.60021, y1 = −0.111255, y2 = −0.250847,
             and y3 = −0.429696.
8.6 More on Errors; Stability
              In Section 8.1 we discussed some ideas related to the errors that can occur in a
              numerical approximation of the solution of the initial value problem
                                                 y = f (t, y),    y(t0 ) = y0 .                        (1)
              In this section we continue that discussion and also point out some other difficulties
              that can arise. Some of the points that we wish to make are fairly difficult to treat in
              detail, so we will illustrate them by means of examples.
              Truncation and Round-off Errors. Recall that for the Euler method we showed that the
              local truncation error is proportional to h2 and that for a finite interval,the global trun-
              cation error is at most a constant times h. In general, for a method of order p, the local
              truncation error is proportional to hp+1 and the global truncation error on a finite
              interval is bounded by a constant times hp . To achieve high accuracy, we normally use
              a numerical procedure for which p is fairly large, perhaps 4 or higher. As p increases,
              the formula used in computing yn+1 normally becomes more complicated, and hence
              more calculations are required at each step. However, this is usually not a serious
              problem unless f (t, y) is very complicated or the calculation must be repeated very
              many times. If the step size h is decreased, the global truncation error is decreased by
              the same factor raised to the power p. However, as we mentioned in Section 8.1, if h is
              very small, a great many steps will be required to cover a fixed interval, and the global
              round-off error may be larger than the global truncation error. The situation is shown
              schematically in Figure 8.6.1. We assume that the round-off error Rn is proportional
              to the number of computations performed and therefore is inversely proportional to
              the step size h. On the other hand, the truncation error En is proportional to a positive
              power of h. From Eq. (17) of Section 8.1, we know that the total error is bounded by
              |En | + |Rn |; hence we wish to choose h so as to minimize this quantity. The optimum
              value of h occurs when the rate of increase of the truncation error (as h increases) is
              balanced by the rate of decrease of the round-off error, as indicated in Figure 8.6.1.
                                           Error
                                                       ⏐En⏐ + ⏐Rn⏐
                                                                           ⏐En⏐
                                                   ⏐Rn⏐
                                                              hopt               h
                 FIGURE 8.6.1 The dependence of truncation and round-off errors on the step size h.
              Consider the example problem
   EXAMPLE
                                                 y = 1 − t + 4y,    y(0) = 1.                          (2)
      1
              Using the Euler method with various step sizes, calculate approximate values for the solution
              φ(t) at t = 0.5 and t = 1. Try to determine the optimum step size.
   Keeping only four digits in order to shorten the calculations, we obtain the data shown in
Table 8.6.1. The first two columns are the step size h and the number of steps N required to
traverse the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 1. Then yN/2 and yN are approximations to φ(0.5) = 8.712 and
φ(1) = 64.90, respectively. These quantities appear in the third and fifth columns. The fourth
and sixth columns display the differences between the calculated values and the actual value
of the solution.
            TABLE 8.6.1 Approximations to the Solution of the Initial Value
            Problem y = 1 − t + 4y, y(0) = 1 Using the Euler Method with
            Different Step Sizes
                   h            N          yN/2       Error         yN       Error
               0.01             100       8.390       0.322       60.12       4.78
               0.005            200       8.551       0.161       62.51       2.39
               0.002            500       8.633       0.079       63.75       1.15
               0.001          1000        8.656       0.056       63.94       0.96
               0.0008         1250        8.636       0.076       63.78       1.12
               0.000625       1600        8.616       0.096       64.35       0.55
               0.0005         2000        8.772       0.060       64.00       0.90
               0.0004         2500        8.507       0.205       63.40       1.50
               0.00025        4000        8.231       0.481       56.77       8.13
   For relatively large step sizes, the round-off error is much less than the global truncation
error. Consequently, the total error is approximately the same as the global truncation error,
which for the Euler method is bounded by a constant times h. Thus, as the step size is reduced,
the error is reduced proportionally.The first three lines inTable 8.6.1 show this type of behavior.
For h = 0.001 the error has been further reduced, but much less than proportionally; this
indicates that round-off error is becoming important. As h is reduced still more, the error
begins to fluctuate, and further improvements in accuracy become problematical. For values
of h less than 0.0005, the error is clearly increasing, which indicates that round-off error is
now the dominant part of the total error.
   These results can also be expressed in terms of the number of steps N. For N less than
about 1000, accuracy is improved by taking more steps, while for N greater than about 2000,
using more steps has an adverse effect. Thus for this problem it is best to use an N somewhere
between 1000 and 2000. For the calculations shown in Table 8.6.1, the best result at t = 0.5
occurs for N = 1000, while at t = 1.0 the best result is for N = 1600.
   You should be careful not to read too much into the results shown in Example 1.
The optimum ranges for h and N depend on the differential equation, the numerical
method that is used, and the number of digits that are retained in the calculation.
Nevertheless, it is generally true that if too many steps are required in a calculation,
then eventually round-off error is likely to accumulate to the point where it seriously
degrades the accuracy of the procedure. For many problems this is not a concern:
for them, any of the fourth order methods we have discussed in Sections 8.3 and 8.4
will produce good results with a number of steps far less than the level at which
round-off error becomes important. For some problems, however, round-off error
does become vitally important. For such problems, the choice of method may be
crucial. This is also one reason why modern codes provide a means of adjusting
the step size as they go along, using a larger step size wherever possible and a very
small step size only where necessary.
Vertical Asymptotes. As a second example, consider the problem of approximating the
solution y = φ(t) of
                                y = t 2 + y2 ,    y(0) = 1.                          (3)
   Since the differential equation is nonlinear, the existence and uniqueness theorem
(Theorem 2.4.2) guarantees only that there is a solution in some interval about t = 0.
Suppose that we try to compute an approximation to the solution of the initial value
problem on the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 using different numerical procedures.
   If we use the Euler method with h = 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01, we find the follow-
ing approximate values at t = 1: 7.189548, 12.32093, and 90.75551, respectively. The
large differences among the computed values are convincing evidence that we should
use a more accurate numerical procedure—the Runge–Kutta method, for exam-
ple. Using the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.1, we find the approximate value
735.0991 at t = 1,which is quite different from those obtained using the Euler method.
Repeating the calculations using step sizes of h = 0.05 and h = 0.01, we obtain the
information shown in Table 8.6.2.
                      TABLE 8.6.2 Approximations to the Solution
                      of the Initial Value Problem y = t 2 + y2 ,
                      y(0) = 1 Using the Runge–Kutta Method
                            h          t = 0.90         t = 1.0
                          0.1          14.02182        735.0991
                          0.05         14.27117     1.75863 × 105
                          0.01         14.30478     2.0913 × 102893
                          0.001        14.30486
  The values at t = 0.90 are reasonable, and we might well believe that the solution
has a value of about 14.305 at t = 0.90. However, it is not clear what is happen-
ing between t = 0.9 and t = 1.0. To help clarify this, let us turn to some analytical
approximations to the solution of the initial value problem (3). Note that on 0 ≤ t ≤ 1,
                                   y2 ≤ t 2 + y2 ≤ 1 + y2 .                           (4)
This suggests that the solution y = φ1 (t) of
                                 y = 1 + y2 ,     y(0) = 1                           (5)
and the solution y = φ2 (t) of
                                    y = y2 ,    y(0) = 1                             (6)
are upper and lower bounds, respectively, for the solution y = φ(t) of the original
problem, since all these solutions pass through the same initial point. Indeed, it can be
shown (for example, by the iteration method of Section 2.8) that φ2 (t) ≤ φ(t) ≤ φ1 (t)
as long as these functions exist. The important thing to note is that we can solve
Eqs. (5) and (6) for φ1 and φ2 by separation of variables. We find that
                                          π                   1
                         φ1 (t) = tan t +     ,     φ2 (t) =      .                  (7)
                                          4                  1−t
Thus φ2 (t) → ∞ as t → 1, and φ1 (t) → ∞ as t → π/4 ∼        = 0.785. These calculations
show that the solution of the original initial value problem exists at least for
0 ≤ t < π/4 and at most for 0 ≤ t < 1. The solution of the problem (3) has a vertical
asymptote for some t in π/4 ≤ t ≤ 1 and thus does not exist on the entire interval
0 ≤ t ≤ 1.
   Our numerical calculations, however, suggest that we can go beyond t = π/4, and
probably beyond t = 0.9. Assuming that the solution of the initial value problem
exists at t = 0.9 and has the value 14.305, we can obtain a more accurate estimate of
what happens for larger t by considering the initial value problems (5) and (6) with
y(0) = 1 replaced by y(0.9) = 14.305. Then we obtain
                 φ1 (t) = tan(t + 0.60100),     φ2 (t) = 1/(0.96991 − t),            (8)
where five decimal places have been kept in the calculation. Therefore, φ1 (t) → ∞ as
t → π/2 − 0.60100 ∼   = 0.96980 and φ2 (t) → ∞ as t → 0.96991. We conclude that the
asymptote of the solution of the initial value problem (3) lies between these two
values. This example illustrates the sort of information that can be obtained by a
judicious combination of analytical and numerical work.
Stability. The concept of stability is associated with the possibility that small errors
that are introduced in the course of a mathematical procedure may die out as the
procedure continues. Conversely, instability occurs if small errors tend to increase,
perhaps without bound. For example, in Section 2.5 we identified equilibrium solu-
tions of a differential equation as (asymptotically) stable or unstable, depending on
whether solutions that were initially near the equilibrium solution tended to approach
it or to depart from it as t increased. Somewhat more generally, the solution of an
initial value problem is asymptotically stable if initially nearby solutions tend to
approach the given solution, and unstable if they tend to depart from it. Visually, in
an asymptotically stable problem the graphs of solutions will come together, while
in an unstable problem they will separate.
   If we are investigating an initial value problem numerically, the best that we can
hope for is that the numerical approximation will mimic the behavior of the actual
solution. We cannot make an unstable problem into a stable one merely by approx-
imating its solution numerically. However, it may well happen that a numerical
procedure will introduce instabilities that were not part of the original problem, and
this can cause trouble in approximating the solution. Avoidance of such instabilities
may require us to place restrictions on the step size h.
   To illustrate what can happen in the simplest possible context, consider the
differential equation
                                        dy/dt = ry,                                  (9)
where r is a constant. Suppose that in approximating the solution of this equation,
we have reached the point (tn , yn ). Let us compare the exact solution of Eq. (9) that
passes through this point, namely,
                                   y = yn exp[r(t − tn )],                          (10)
with numerical approximations obtained from the Euler formula
                                  yn+1 = yn + hf (tn , yn )                         (11)
and from the backward Euler formula
                               yn+1 = yn + hf (tn+1 , yn+1 ).                       (12)
From the Euler formula (11) we obtain
                            yn+1 = yn + hryn = yn (1 + rh).                         (13)
Similarly, from the backward Euler formula (12) we have
                                   yn+1 = yn + hryn+1 ,
or
                                  yn
                       yn+1 =          = yn [1 + rh + (rh)2 + · · ·].               (14)
                               1 − rh
Finally, evaluating the solution (10) at tn + h, we find that
                                                                     
                                                           (rh)2
                    yn+1 = yn exp(rh) = yn 1 + rh +              + ··· .            (15)
                                                             2
Comparing Eqs. (13), (14), and (15), we see that the errors in both the Euler formula
and the backward Euler formula are of order h2 , as the theory predicts.
   Now suppose that we change the value yn to yn + δ. Think, if you wish, of δ as the
error that has accumulated by the time we reach t = tn . The question is whether this
error increases or decreases in going one more step to tn+1 .
   For the exact solution (15), the change in yn+1 due to the change δ in yn is just
δ exp(rh). This quantity is less than δ if exp(rh) < 1, or in other words if r < 0. This
confirms our conclusion in Chapter 2 that Eq. (9) is asymptotically stable if r < 0,
and is unstable if r > 0.
   For the backward Euler method, the change in yn+1 in Eq. (14) due to δ is δ/(1 − rh).
For r < 0 the quantity 1/(1 − rh) is always nonnegative and less than 1. Thus, if the
differential equation is stable, then so is the backward Euler method for an arbitrary
step size h.
   On the other hand, for the Euler method, the change in yn+1 in Eq. (13) due to
δ is δ(1 + rh). For r < 0 we can write 1 + rh as 1 − |r|h. Then the requirement that
|1 + rh| < 1 is equivalent to
                        −1 < 1 − |r|h < 1,      or  0 < |r|h < 2.
Consequently, h must satisfy h < 2/|r|. Thus the Euler method is not stable for this
problem unless h is sufficiently small.
   The restriction on the step size h in using the Euler method in the preceding
example is rather mild unless |r| is quite large. Nonetheless, the example illustrates
that it may be necessary to restrict h in order to achieve stability in the numerical
method, even though the initial value problem itself is stable for all values of h.
Problems for which a much smaller step size is needed for stability than for accuracy
          are called stiff. The backward differentiation formulas described in Section 8.4 (of
          which the backward Euler formula is the lowest order example) are the most popular
          formulas for dealing with stiff problems. The following example illustrates the kind of
          instability that can occur when we try to approximate the solution of a stiff problem.
          Consider the initial value problem
EXAMPLE
                                         y = −100y + 100t + 1,          y(0) = 1.                        (16)
    2
          Find numerical approximations to the solution for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 using the Euler, backward Euler,
  A Stiff and Runge–Kutta methods. Compare the numerical results with the exact solution.
 Problem      Since the differential equation is linear, it is easy to solve, and the solution of the initial
          value problem (16) is
                                                  y = φ(t) = e−100t + t.                                  (17)
          Some values of the solution φ(t), correct to six decimal places, are given in the second column of
          Table 8.6.3, and a graph of the solution is shown in Figure 8.6.2. There is a thin layer (sometimes
          called a boundary layer) to the right of t = 0 in which the exponential term is significant
          and the solution varies rapidly. Once past this layer, however, φ(t) ∼      = t and the graph of the
          solution is essentially a straight line. The width of the boundary layer is somewhat arbitrary,
          but it is certainly small. At t = 0.1, for example, exp(−100t) ∼   = 0.000045.
          TABLE 8.6.3 Numerical Approximations to the Solution of the Initial Value Problem
          y = −100y + 100t + 1, y(0) = 1
            t      Exact         Euler          Euler      Runge–Kutta        Runge–Kutta Backward Euler
                                 0.025       0.0166 . . .    0.0333 . . .          0.025             0.1
          0.0    1.000000       1.000000       1.000000       1.000000          1.000000          1.000000
          0.05   0.056738       2.300000 −0.246296                              0.470471
          0.1    0.100045       5.162500       0.187792      10.6527            0.276796          0.190909
          0.2    0.200000 25.8289              0.207707    111.559              0.231257          0.208264
          0.4    0.400000 657.241              0.400059       1.24 × 104        0.400977          0.400068
          0.6    0.600000       1.68 × 104     0.600000       1.38 × 106        0.600031          0.600001
          0.8    0.800000      4.31 × 105      0.800000       1.54 × 108        0.800001          0.800000
          1.0    1.000000      1.11 × 107      1.000000       1.71 × 1010       1.000000          1.000000
                             y
                            1
                          0.8
                          0.6
                          0.4
                          0.2
                                         0.2         0.4        0.6           0.8          1    t
           FIGURE 8.6.2 The solution of the initial value problem y = −100y + 100t + 1, y(0) = 1.
           If we plan to approximate the solution (17) numerically, we might intuitively expect that a
        small step size will be needed only in the boundary layer. To make this expectation a bit more
        precise, recall from Section 8.1 that the local truncation errors for the Euler and backward
        Euler methods are proportional to φ (t). For this problem φ (t) = 104 e−100t , which varies from
        a value of 104 at t = 0 to nearly zero for t > 0.2. Thus a very small step size is needed for
        accuracy near t = 0, but a much larger step size is adequate once t is a little larger.
           On the other hand, the stability analysis in Eqs. (9) through (15) also applies to this problem.
        Since r = −100 for Eq. (16), it follows that for stability we need h < 0.02 for the Euler method,
        but there is no corresponding restriction for the backward Euler method.
           Some results obtained from the Euler method are shown in columns three and four of
        Table 8.6.3. The values for h = 0.025 are worthless because of instability, while those for
        h = 0.01666 . . . are reasonably accurate for t ≥ 0.2. However, comparable accuracy for this
        range of t is obtained for h = 0.1 by using the backward Euler method, as shown by the results
        in column seven of the table.
           The situation is not improved by using, instead of the Euler method, a more accurate one,
        such as Runge–Kutta. For this problem the Runge–Kutta method is unstable for h = 0.033 . . .
        but stable for h = 0.025, as shown by the results in columns five and six of Table 8.6.3.
           The results given in the table for t = 0.05 and for t = 0.1 show that in the boundary layer,
        a smaller step size is needed to obtain an accurate approximation. You are invited to explore
        this matter further in Problem 3.
           The following example illustrates some other difficulties that may be encountered
        in dealing with numerical approximations for unstable differential equations.
        Consider the task of finding numerical approximations to two linearly independent solutions
EXAMPLE of the second order linear equation
   3                                                     y − 10π2 y = 0                                  (18)
        for t > 0. Note any difficulties that may arise.
           Since we contemplate a numerical approach to this problem, we first convert Eq. (18) into
        a system of two first order equations so that we can use the methods of Section 8.5. Thus we
        let x1 = y and x2 = y . In this way we obtain the system
                                                 x1 = x2 ,         x2 = 10π2 x1 ,
        or, if x = (x1 , x2 )T ,
                                                                            
                                                                 0        1
                                                     x =                       x.                          (19)
                                                                10π2       0
        The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the coefficient matrix in Eq. (19) are
                                                                                                    
                             √           (1)
                                                     1                        √          (2)
                                                                                                     1
                     r1 = 10π,         ξ     =    √          ;      r2 = − 10π,        ξ     =    √      , (20)
                                                    10π                                          − 10π
        so two linearly independent solutions of the system (19) are
                                                                                        
                                              1        √                             1         √
                                 (1)                                   (2)
                                x (t) =    √         e   10πt
                                                              ,      x (t) =        √        e− 10πt .     (21)
                                             10π                                  − 10π
The corresponding solutions          √
                                         of the second order   √
                                                                      equation (18) are the first components of
x(1) (t) and x(2) (t): y1 (t) = e 10πt and y2 (t) = e− 10πt , respectively.
   We also wish to consider another pair of linearly independent solutions obtained by forming
linear combinations of x(1) (t) and x(2) (t):
                                                                                √          
                               (3)                                        cosh     10πt
                             x     (t) = 21 x(1) (t) + 21 x(2) (t) =    √           √                            (22)
                                                                         10π sinh 10πt
and
                                                                                √          
                                                                          sinh    10πt
                            x(4) (t) = 21 x(1) (t) − 21 x(2) (t) = √                √                            (23)
                                                                         10π cosh 10πt
Although the √ expressions  √
                                     for x(3) (t) and      (4)
                                                    √ x (t) are    √
                                                                       quite different, recall that for large t we
have cosh 10πt ∼ e            10πt
                                    /2 and sinh 10πt ∼ e 10πt /2. Thus if t is large enough and only a
fixed number of digits are retained, then numerically the two vector functions x(3) (t) and x(4) (t)
look exactly the same. For instance, correct to eight digits, we have, for t = 1,
                                            √                  √
                                      sinh    10π = cosh          10π = 10,315.894.
If we retain only eight digits, then the two solutions x(3) (t) and x(4) (t) are identical at t = 1 and
indeed for all t > 1. Even if we retain more digits, eventually the two solutions will appear
(numerically) to be identical. This phenomenon is called numerical dependence.
    For the system (19) we can avoid the issue of numerical dependence by calculating instead                   √
the solutions x(1) (t) and x(2) (t). From    √
                                                     Eq. (21) we know that x(1) (t) is proportional to e 10πt ,
while x(2) (t) is proportional to e− 10πt , so they behave very differently as t increases. Even so,
we encounter difficulty in calculating x(2) (t) correctly on a large interval. Observe that x(2) (t)
is the solution of Eq. (19) subject to the initial condition
                                                                       
                                                                    1
                                                   x(0) =         √       .                                      (24)
                                                                − 10π
If we attempt to approximate the solution of the initial value problem (19), (24) numerically,
then at each step of the calculation we introduce truncation and round-off errors. Thus, at
any point tn , the data to be used in going to the next point are not precisely the values of the
components√ of x(2) (tn ). The      √
                                       solution of the initial value problem with these data at tn involves
not only e− 10πt but also e 10πt . Because the error in the data               √
                                                                                  at tn is small, the latter
                                                                                                          √
                                                                                                             function
appears with a very small coefficient. Nevertheless, since e− 10πt tends to zero and e 10πt grows
very rapidly, the latter eventually dominates, and ultimately the calculated solution is very far
from x(2) (t).
   To be specific, suppose that we try to approximate the solution                  √
                                                                                       of the initial value problem
(19), (24), the first component of which is the solution y2 (t) = e− 10πt of the second order initial
value problem
                                                                                       √
                            y − 10π2 y = 0,             y(0) = 1,        y (0) = − 10π.                       (25)
Using the Runge–Kutta method with a step size h = 0.01 and keeping eight digits in the
calculations, we obtain the results in Table 8.6.4. It is clear from these results that the numerical
approximation begins to deviate significantly from the exact solution for t > 0.5, and soon
differs from it by many orders of magnitude. The reason is the presence, in the numerical
                                                                                 √
approximation, of a small component of the exponentially growing quantity e 10πt . With eight-
digit
  √
         arithmetic we can expect a round-off error of the order of 10−8 at each step. Since
e   10πt
          grows by a factor of 3.7 × 1021 from t = 0 to t = 5, an error of order 10−8 near t = 0
can produce an error of order 1013 at t = 5 even if no further errors are introduced in the
intervening calculations. The results given in Table 8.6.4 demonstrate that this is exactly what
happens.
                        TABLE 8.6.4 Exact√Solution of y − 10π2 y = 0,
                        y(0) = 1, y (0) = − 10π and Numerical
                        Approximation Using the Runge–Kutta Method
                        with h = 0.01
                                                  y
                             t           Numerical             Exact
                           0.0         1.0                1.0
                           0.25        8.3439 × 10−2      8.3438 × 10−2
                           0.5         6.9623 × 10−3      6.9620 × 10−3
                           0.75        5.8409 × 10−4      5.8089 × 10−4
                           1.0         8.6688 × 10−5      4.8469 × 10−5
                           1.5         5.4900 × 10−3      3.3744 × 10−7
                           2.0         7.8852 × 10−1      2.3492 × 10−9
                           2.5         1.1326 × 102       1.6355 × 10−11
                           3.0         1.6268 × 104       1.1386 × 10−13
                           3.5         2.3368 × 106       7.9272 × 10−16
                           4.0         3.3565 × 108       5.5189 × 10−18
                           4.5         4.8211 × 1010      3.8422 × 10−20
                           5.0         6.9249 × 1012      2.6749 × 10−22
    You should bear in mind that the numerical values of the entries in the second column of
Table 8.6.4 are extremely sensitive to slight variations in how the calculations are executed.
Regardless of such details, however, the exponential growth of the approximation will be
clearly evident.
    Equation (18) is highly unstable,and the behavior shown in this example is typical of unstable
problems. We can track a solution accurately for a while, and the interval can be extended by
using smaller step sizes or more accurate methods, but eventually the instability in the problem
itself takes over and leads to large errors.
Some Comments on Numerical Methods. In this chapter we have introduced several nu-
merical methods for approximating the solution of an initial value problem. We have
tried to emphasize some important ideas while maintaining a reasonable level of
complexity. For one thing, we have always used a uniform step size, whereas produc-
tion codes that are currently in use provide for varying the step size as the calculation
proceeds.
    There are several considerations that must be taken into account in choosing step
sizes. Of course, one is accuracy; too large a step size leads to an inaccurate result.
Normally, an error tolerance is prescribed in advance, and the step size at each step
must be consistent with this requirement. As we have seen, the step size must also be
         chosen so that the method is stable. Otherwise, small errors will grow and soon render
         the results worthless. Finally, for implicit methods an equation must be solved at each
         step, and the method used to solve the equation may impose additional restrictions
         on the step size.
            In choosing a method,one must also balance the considerations of accuracy and sta-
         bility against the amount of time required to execute each step. An implicit method,
         such as the Adams–Moulton method, requires more calculations for each step, but
         if its accuracy and stability permit a larger step size (and consequently fewer steps),
         then this may more than compensate for the additional calculations. The backward
         differentiation formulas of moderate order (say, four) are highly stable and are
         therefore indicated for stiff problems, for which stability is the controlling factor.
            Some current production codes also permit the order of the method to be varied,
         as well as the step size, as the calculation proceeds. The error is estimated at each
         step, and the order and step size are chosen to satisfy the prescribed error tolerance.
         In practice, Adams methods up to order twelve and backward differentiation formu-
         las up to order five are in use. Higher order backward differentiation formulas are
         unsuitable because of a lack of stability.
            Finally, we note that the smoothness of the function f —that is, the number of
         continuous derivatives that it possesses—is a factor in choosing the order of the
         method to be used. High order methods lose some of their accuracy if f is not smooth
         to a corresponding order.
PROBLEMS   1. To obtain some idea of the possible dangers of small errors in the initial conditions, such
              as those due to round-off, consider the initial value problem
                                                y = t + y − 3,     y(0) = 2.
              (a) Show that the solution is y = φ1 (t) = 2 − t.
              (b) Suppose that in the initial condition a mistake is made, and 2.001 is used instead of 2.
              Determine the solution y = φ2 (t) in this case, and compare the difference φ2 (t) − φ1 (t) at
              t = 1 and as t → ∞.
           2. Consider the initial value problem
                                                 y = t 2 + ey ,  y(0) = 0.                             (i)
              Using the Runge–Kutta method with step size h, we obtain the results in Table 8.6.5.
              These results suggest that the solution has a vertical asymptote between t = 0.9 and t = 1.0.
                                      TABLE 8.6.5 Approximations to the
                                       Solution of the Initial Value Problem
                                       y = t 2 + ey , y(0) = 0 Using the
                                       Runge–Kutta Method
                                            h          t = 0.90       t = 1.0
                                          0.02         3.42985        > 1038
                                          0.01         3.42982        > 1038
    (a) Let y = φ(t) be the solution of initial value problem (i). Further, let y = φ1 (t) be the
    solution of
                                      y = 1 + e y ,      y(0) = 0,                            (ii)
    and let y = φ2 (t) be the solution of
                                         y = ey ,      y(0) = 0.                             (iii)
    Show that
                                          φ2 (t) ≤ φ(t) ≤ φ1 (t)                              (iv)
    on some interval, contained in 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, where all three solutions exist.
    (b) Determine φ1 (t) and φ2 (t). Then show that φ(t) → ∞ for some t between
    t = ln 2 ∼
             = 0.69315 and t = 1.
    (c) Solve the differential equations y = ey and y = 1 + ey , respectively, with the initial
    condition y(0.9) = 3.4298. Use the results to show that φ(t) → ∞ when t ∼     = 0.932.
 3. Consider again the initial value problem (16) from Example 2. Investigate how small a
    step size h must be chosen to ensure that the error at t = 0.05 and at t = 0.1 is less than
    0.0005.
    (a) Use the Euler method.
    (b) Use the backward Euler method.
    (c) Use the Runge–Kutta method.
 4. Consider the initial value problem
                               y = −10y + 2.5t 2 + 0.5t,        y(0) = 4.
    (a) Find the solution y = φ(t) and draw its graph for 0 ≤ t ≤ 5.
    (b) The stability analysis in the text suggests that for this problem, the Euler method is
    stable only for h < 0.2. Confirm that this is true by applying the Euler method to this
    problem for 0 ≤ t ≤ 5 with step sizes near 0.2.
    (c) Apply the Runge–Kutta method to this problem for 0 ≤ t ≤ 5 with various step sizes.
    What can you conclude about the stability of this method?
    (d) Apply the backward Euler method to this problem for 0 ≤ t ≤ 5 with various step
    sizes. What step size is needed to ensure that the error at t = 5 is less than 0.01?
In each of Problems 5 and 6:
(a) Find a formula for the solution of the initial value problem, and note that it is independent
of λ.
(b) Use the Runge–Kutta method with h = 0.01 to compute approximate values of the
solution for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 for various values of λ such as λ = 1, 10, 20, and 50.
(c) Explain the differences, if any, between the exact solution and the numerical approx-
imations.
 5. y − λy = 1 − λt,       y(0) = 0                 6. y − λy = 2t − λt 2 ,  y(0) = 0
REFERENCES There are many books of varying degrees of sophistication that deal with numerical analysis in general
           and the numerical approximation of solutions of ordinary differential equations in particular. Among
           these are:
           Ascher, Uri M., and Petzold, Linda R., Computer Methods for Ordinary Differential Equations and
              Differential-Algebraic Equations (Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
              1998).
           Atkinson, Kendall E., Han, Weimin, and Stewart, David, Numerical Solution of Ordinary Differential
              Equations (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2009).
           Gear, C. William, Numerical Initial Value Problems in Ordinary Differential Equations (Englewood Cliffs,
              NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1971).
           Henrici, Peter, Discrete Variable Methods in Ordinary Differential Equations (New York: Wiley, 1962).
           Henrici,Peter,Error Propagation for Difference Methods (NewYork:Wiley,1963;Huntington,NY:Krieger,
              1977).
           Mattheij, Robert, and Molenaar, Jaap, Ordinary Differential Equations in Theory and Practice
              (New York: Wiley, 1996; Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2002).
           Shampine, Lawrence F., Numerical Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations (New York: Chapman and
              Hall, 1994).
              A detailed exposition of Adams predictor–corrector methods, including practical guidelines for
           implementation, may be found in
           Shampine, L. F., and Gordon, M. K., Computer Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations: The Initial
              Value Problem (San Francisco: Freeman, 1975).
              Many books on numerical analysis have chapters on differential equations. For example, at an
           elementary level, see
           Burden, Richard L., and Faires, J. Douglas, Numerical Analysis (9th ed.) (Boston: Brooks/Cole, Cengage
              Learning, 2011).
              The following two books are at a slightly higher level and include information on implementing the
           algorithms in MATLAB.
           Atkinson, Kendall E., and Han, Weimin, Elementary Numerical Analysis (3rd ed.) (Hoboken, NJ:
              Wiley, 2004).
           Shampine, L. F., Gladwell, I., and Thompson, S., Solving ODEs with MATLAB (New York: Cambridge
              University Press, 2003).
 CHAPTER
     9
               Nonlinear
               Differential
               Equations and
               Stability
              There are many differential equations, especially nonlinear ones, that are not sus-
               ceptible to analytical solution in any reasonably convenient manner. Numerical
               approximation methods, such as those discussed in the preceding chapter, provide
               one means of dealing with these equations. Another approach, presented in this
               chapter, is geometrical in character and leads to a qualitative understanding of the
               behavior of solutions rather than to detailed quantitative information.
9.1 The Phase Plane: Linear Systems
               Since many differential equations cannot be solved conveniently by analytical meth-
               ods, it is important to consider what qualitative1 information can be obtained about
               their solutions without actually solving the equations. The questions that we consider
               in this chapter are associated with the idea of stability of a solution, and the methods
               that we employ are basically geometrical. Both the concept of stability and the use
               1The qualitative theory of differential equations was created by Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) in several
               major papers between 1880 and 1886. Poincaré was a professor at the University of Paris and is generally
               considered the leading mathematician of his time. He made fundamental discoveries in several differ-
               ent areas of mathematics, including complex function theory, partial differential equations, and celestial
               mechanics. In a series of papers beginning in 1894, he initiated the use of modern methods in topology. In
               differential equations he was a pioneer in the use of asymptotic series, one of the most powerful tools of
               contemporary applied mathematics. Among other things, he used asymptotic expansions to obtain solu-
               tions about irregular singular points, thereby extending the work of Fuchs and Frobenius discussed in
               Chapter 5.
                                                                                                                   495
of geometrical analysis were introduced in Chapter 1 and used in Section 2.5 for first
order autonomous equations
                                         dy/dt = f (y).                                    (1)
In this chapter we refine the ideas and extend the discussion to autonomous systems of
equations. We are particularly interested in nonlinear systems because they typically
cannot be solved in terms of elementary functions. Further, we consider primarily
systems of two equations because they lend themselves to geometrical analysis in a
plane, rather than in a higher-dimensional space.
   However, before taking up nonlinear systems, we want to summarize some of the
results that we obtained in Chapter 7 for two-dimensional systems of first order linear
homogeneous equations with constant coefficients. Such a system has the form
                                         dx/dt = Ax,                                       (2)
where A is a 2 × 2 constant matrix and x is a 2 × 1 vector. In Sections 7.5 through 7.8,
we found that we could solve such systems by seeking solutions of the form x = ξert .
By substituting for x in Eq. (2), we find that
                                        (A − rI)ξ = 0.                                     (3)
Thus r must be an eigenvalue and ξ a corresponding eigenvector of the coefficient
matrix A. The eigenvalues are the roots of the polynomial equation
                                       det(A − rI) = 0,                                    (4)
and the eigenvectors are determined from Eq. (3) up to an arbitrary multiplicative
constant. Although we presented graphs of solutions of equations of the form (2)
in Sections 7.5, 7.6, and 7.8, our main emphasis there was on finding a convenient
expression for the general solution. Our goal in this section is to bring together the
geometrical information for linear systems in one place. We use this information in
the rest of the chapter to investigate the much more difficult nonlinear systems.
   In Section 2.5 we found that points where the right side of Eq. (1) is zero are
of special importance. Such points correspond to constant solutions, or equilibrium
solutions, of Eq. (1) and are often called critical points. Similarly, for the system (2),
points where Ax = 0 correspond to equilibrium (constant) solutions, and again they
are called critical points. We will assume that A is nonsingular, or that det A = 0. It
follows that x = 0 is the only critical point of the system (2).
   Recall that a solution of Eq. (2) is a vector function x = φ(t) that satisfies the differ-
ential equation. Such a function can be viewed as a parametric representation for a
curve in the x1 x2 -plane. It is often useful to regard this curve as the path, or trajectory,
traversed by a moving particle whose velocity dx/dt is specified by the differential
equation. The x1 x2 -plane itself is called the phase plane, and a representative set of
trajectories is referred to as a phase portrait.
   In analyzing the system (2), we must consider several different cases, depending
on the nature of the eigenvalues of A. We will characterize the differential equation
according to the geometric pattern formed by its trajectories. In each case we discuss
the behavior of the trajectories in general and illustrate it with an example. It is
important that you become familiar with the types of behavior that the trajectories
have for each case, because these are the basic ingredients of the qualitative theory
of differential equations.
CASE 1 Real, Unequal Eigenvalues of the Same Sign. In this case, the general solution of
       Eq. (2) is
                                           x = c1 ξ (1) er1 t + c2 ξ (2) er2 t ,               (5)
       where r1 and r2 are either both positive or both negative. Suppose first that
       r1 < r2 < 0 and that the eigenvectors ξ (1) and ξ (2) are as shown in Figure 9.1.1a.
       It follows from Eq. (5) that x → 0 as t → ∞ regardless of the values of c1 and c2 ; in
       other words, all solutions approach the critical point at the origin as t → ∞. If the
       solution starts at an initial point on the line through ξ (1) , then c2 = 0. Consequently,
       the solution remains on the line through ξ (1) for all t and approaches the origin as
       t → ∞. Similarly, if the initial point is on the line through ξ (2) , then the solution
       approaches the origin along that line. In the general situation, it is helpful to rewrite
       Eq. (5) in the form                                                      
                                        x = er2 t c1 ξ (1) e(r1 −r2 )t + c2 ξ (2) .            (6)
       Observe that r1 − r2 < 0. Therefore, as long as c2  = 0, the term c1 ξ (1) exp[(r1 − r2 )t]
       is of negligible magnitude compared to that of c2 ξ (2) for t sufficiently large. Thus,
       as t → ∞, the trajectory not only approaches the origin but also tends toward the
       line through ξ (2) . Hence all solutions are tangent to ξ (2) at the critical point except
       for those solutions that start exactly on the line through ξ (1) . Several trajectories are
       sketched in Figure 9.1.1a. Typical graphs of x1 versus t are shown in Figure 9.1.1b,
       illustrating that all solutions exhibit exponential decay in time. The behavior of x2
       versus t is similar. This type of critical point is called a node or a nodal sink.
                             x2                             x1
                         ξ(2)
                                    ξ(1)
                                              x1
                                                                                           t
                              (a)                                                  (b)
                 FIGURE 9.1.1 A node; r1 < r2 < 0. (a) The phase plane. (b) x1 versus t.
          Let us now look backward in time and inquire what happens as t → −∞. Still
       assuming that r1 < r2 < 0, we note that if c1  = 0, then the dominant term in Eq. (5)
       as t → −∞ is the term involving er1 t . Thus, except for the trajectories lying along the
       line through ξ (2) , for large negative t the trajectories have slopes that are very nearly
       that of the eigenvector ξ (1) . This is also indicated in Figure 9.1.1a.
          If r1 and r2 are both positive, and 0 < r2 < r1 , then the trajectories have the same
       pattern as in Figure 9.1.1a, but the direction of motion is away from, rather than
       toward, the critical point at the origin. In this case x1 and x2 grow exponentially as
       functions of t. Again the critical point is called a node or a nodal source.
          An example of a node occurs in Example 3 of Section 7.5, and its trajectories are
       shown in Figure 7.5.4.
CASE 2 Real Eigenvalues of Opposite Sign. The general solution of Eq. (2) is
                                           x = c1 ξ (1) er1 t + c2 ξ (2) er2 t ,                  (7)
       where r1 > 0 and r2 < 0. Suppose that the eigenvectors ξ (1) and ξ (2) are as shown
       in Figure 9.1.2a. If the solution starts at an initial point on the line through ξ (1) ,
       then it follows that c2 = 0. Consequently, the solution remains on the line through
       ξ (1) for all t, and since r1 > 0, x → ∞ as t → ∞. If the solution starts at an ini-
       tial point on the line through ξ (2) , then it always remains on this line and x → 0
       as t → ∞ because r2 < 0. For solutions starting at other initial points the positive
       exponential is the dominant term in Eq. (7) for large t, so eventually all these solu-
       tions approach infinity asymptotic to the line determined by the eigenvector ξ (1)
       corresponding to the positive eigenvalue r1 . The only solutions that approach the
       critical point at the origin are those that start precisely on the line determined by
       ξ (2) . For large negative t, the dominant term in Eq. (7) is the negative exponen-
       tial, so a typical solution is asymptotic to the line through the eigenvector ξ (2) as
       t → −∞. The exceptions are those solutions that lie exactly on the line through the
       eigenvector ξ (1) ; these solutions approach the origin as t → −∞. The phase portrait
       shown in Figure 9.1.2a is typical of the case in which the eigenvalues are real and of
       opposite sign. The origin is called a saddle point in this case.
           Figure 9.1.2b shows some typical graphs of x1 versus t. For certain initial conditions
       the positive exponential term is absent from the solution, so x1 → 0 as t → ∞. For
       all other initial conditions the positive exponential term eventually dominates and
       causes x1 to be unbounded. The behavior of x2 is similar.
           An example of a saddle point occurs in Example 2 of Section 7.5, and its trajectories
       are shown in Figure 7.5.2.
                                 x2                                  x1
                                      ξ(1)
                            ξ(2)
                                                        x1                                  t
                                  (a)                                            (b)
               FIGURE 9.1.2 A saddle point; r1 > 0, r2 < 0. (a) The phase plane. (b) x1 versus t.
CASE 3 Equal Eigenvalues. We now suppose that r1 = r2 = r. We consider the case in
       which the eigenvalues are negative; if they are positive, the trajectories are similar
       but the direction of motion is reversed. There are two subcases, depending on whether
       the repeated eigenvalue has two independent eigenvectors or only one.
           (a) Two independent eigenvectors. The general solution of Eq. (2) is
                                            x = c1 ξ (1) ert + c2 ξ (2) ert ,                     (8)
where ξ (1) and ξ (2) are the independent eigenvectors. The ratio x2 /x1 is independent
of t but depends on the components of ξ (1) and ξ (2) and on the arbitrary constants
c1 and c2 . Thus every trajectory lies on a straight line through the origin, as shown
in Figure 9.1.3a. Typical graphs of x1 or x2 versus t are shown in Figure 9.1.3b. The
critical point is called a proper node, or sometimes a star point.
                      x2                       x1
                  ξ(2)     ξ(1)
                                    x1                                            t
                       (a)                                       (b)
         FIGURE 9.1.3 A proper node, two independent eigenvectors; r1 = r2 < 0.
                              (a) The phase plane. (b) x1 versus t.
   (b) One independent eigenvector. As shown in Section 7.8, the general solution
of Eq. (2) in this case is
                                 x = c1 ξert + c2 (ξtert + ηert ),                      (9)
where ξ is the eigenvector and η is the generalized eigenvector associated with the
repeated eigenvalue. For large t the dominant term in Eq. (9) is c2 ξtert . Thus, as
t → ∞, every trajectory approaches the origin tangent to the line through the eigen-
vector. This is true even if c2 = 0, for then the solution x = c1 ξert lies on this line.
Similarly, for large negative t the term c2 ξtert is again the dominant one, so as
t → −∞, the slope of each trajectory approaches the slope of the eigenvector ξ.
   The orientation of the trajectories depends on the relative positions of ξ and η.
One possible situation is shown in Figure 9.1.4a. To locate the trajectories, it is helpful
to write the solution (9) in the form
                              x = [(c1 ξ + c2 η) + c2 ξt]ert = yert ,                  (10)
where y = (c1 ξ + c2 η) + c2 ξt. Observe that the vector y determines the direction of
x, whereas the scalar quantity ert affects only the magnitude of x. Also note that for
fixed values of c1 and c2 , the expression for y is a vector equation of the straight line
through the point c1 ξ + c2 η and parallel to ξ.
   To sketch the trajectory corresponding to a given pair of values of c1 and c2 , you can
proceed in the following way. First, draw the line given by (c1 ξ + c2 η) + c2 ξt and note
the direction of increasing t on this line. Two such lines are shown in Figure 9.1.4a, one
for c2 > 0 and the other for c2 < 0. Next, note that the given trajectory passes through
the point c1 ξ + c2 η when t = 0. Further, as t increases, the direction of the vector x
given by Eq. (10) follows the direction of increasing t on the line, but the magnitude of
             x rapidly decreases and approaches zero because of the decaying exponential factor
             ert . Finally, as t decreases toward −∞, the direction of x is determined by points on
             the corresponding part of the line, and the magnitude of x approaches infinity. In
             this way we obtain the black trajectories in Figure 9.1.4a. A few other trajectories
             are sketched as well, to help complete the diagram. Typical graphs of x1 versus t are
             shown in Figure 9.1.4b.
                 The other possible situation is shown in Figure 9.1.4c, where the relative orientation
             of ξ and η is reversed. As indicated in the figure, this results in a reversal in the
             orientation of the trajectories.
                       x2                                   x1
      c2 ξ
                                    Increasing t
Increasing t                ξ
                                                  x1                                                        t
                           η             c2 ξ
c2 < 0
       c 1ξ + c2 η
           c2 > 0
                        (a)                                                            (b)
                                                            x2
                                                                  Increasing t
                                                                               c2 ξ
                                              c2 > 0
                                                            η                ξ
                                                                                    x1
                                                                     c 1 ξ + c2 η
                                               c2 < 0
                                                                          c2 ξ
                                                 Increasing t
                                                              (c)
                      FIGURE 9.1.4 An improper node, one independent eigenvector; r1 = r2 < 0.
                (a) The phase plane. (b) x1 versus t. (c) The phase plane for the same ξ and a different η.
                 If r1 = r2 > 0, you can sketch the trajectories by following the same procedure. In
             this event the trajectories are traversed in the outward direction, and the orientation
             of the trajectories with respect to that of ξ and η is also reversed.
                 When a double eigenvalue has only a single independent eigenvector, the critical
             point is called an improper or degenerate node. A specific example of this case is
             Example 2 in Section 7.8; the trajectories are shown in Figure 7.8.2.
CASE 4 Complex Eigenvalues with Nonzero Real Part. Suppose that the eigenvalues are
       λ ± iμ, where λ and μ are real, λ  = 0, and μ > 0. In Section 7.6 it was shown that it is
       possible to write the general solution in terms of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
       However, we proceed in a different way.
          Let us consider the system
                                                      
                                                           λ    μ
                                               x =                   x,                        (11)
                                                         −μ       λ
       whose scalar form is
                                 x1 = λx1 + μx2 ,            x2 = −μx1 + λx2 .               (12)
       It is sufficient to examine the system (11) since every 2 × 2 system with eigenvalues
       λ ± iμ can be converted into the form (11) by a linear transformation (an example
       of how this can be done is found in Problem 22). We introduce the polar coordinates
       r, θ given by
                                       r 2 = x12 + x22 ,      tan θ = x2 /x1 .
       By differentiating these equations, we obtain
                         rr  = x1 x1 + x2 x2 ,       (sec2 θ)θ  = (x1 x2 − x2 x1 )/x12 . (13)
       Substituting from Eqs. (12) in the first of Eqs. (13), we find that
                                                       r  = λr,                               (14)
       and hence
                                                       r = ceλt ,                              (15)
       where c is a constant. Similarly, substituting from Eqs. (12) in the second of Eqs. (13),
       and using the fact that sec2 θ = r 2 /x12 , we have
                                                      θ  = −μ.                                (16)
       Hence
                                                    θ = −μt + θ0 ,                             (17)
       where θ0 is the value of θ when t = 0.
          Equations (15) and (17) are parametric equations in polar coordinates of the tra-
       jectories of the system (11). Since μ > 0, it follows from Eq. (17) that θ decreases
       as t increases, so the direction of motion on a trajectory is clockwise. As t → ∞, we
       see from Eq. (15) that r → 0 if λ < 0 and r → ∞ if λ > 0. Thus the trajectories are
       spirals, which approach or recede from the origin, depending on the sign of λ. Both
       possibilities are shown in Figure 9.1.5, along with some typical graphs of x1 versus t.
       The critical point is called a spiral point in this case. Frequently, the terms spiral sink
       and spiral source, respectively, are used to refer to spiral points whose trajectories
       approach, or depart from, the critical point.
                         x2                         x1
                                                                                               t
                                          x1
                          (a)                                            (b)
                         x2                         x1
                                                                                               t
                                          x1
                          (c)                                            (d)
            FIGURE 9.1.5 A spiral point; r1 = λ + iμ, r2 = λ − iμ. (a) λ < 0, the phase plane.
                   (b) λ < 0, x1 versus t. (c) λ > 0, the phase plane. (d) λ > 0, x1 versus t.
          More generally, the trajectories are spirals for any system with complex eigenval-
       ues λ ± iμ, where λ  = 0. The spirals are traversed in the inward or outward direction,
       depending on whether λ is negative or positive. They may be elongated and skewed
       with respect to the coordinate axes, and the direction of motion may be either clock-
       wise or counterclockwise. Further, it is easy to obtain a general idea of the orientation
       of the trajectories directly from the differential equations. Suppose that
                                                                
                                            dx/dt         a b       x
                                                      =                                          (18)
                                            dy/dt         c d       y
       has complex eigenvalues λ ± iμ, and look at the point (0, 1) on the positive y-axis. At
       this point it follows from Eqs. (18) that dx/dt = b and dy/dt = d. Depending on the
       signs of b and d, we can infer the direction of motion and the approximate orientation
       of the trajectories. For instance, if both b and d are negative, then the trajectories cross
       the positive y-axis so as to move down and into the second quadrant. If λ < 0 also,then
       the trajectories must be inward-pointing spirals resembling the one in Figure 9.1.6.
       Another case was given in Example 1 of Section 7.6, whose trajectories are shown in
       Figure 7.6.2.
CASE 5 Pure Imaginary Eigenvalues. In this case λ = 0, and the system (11) reduces to
                                                   
                                                        0       μ
                                             x =                 x                              (19)
                                                      −μ        0
       with eigenvalues ±iμ. Using the same argument as in Case 4, we find that
                                             r  = 0,      θ  = −μ,                             (20)
                                             x2
                                                            x1
                   FIGURE 9.1.6 A spiral point; r = λ ± iμ with λ < 0.
and consequently,
                                  r = c,      θ = −μt + θ0 ,                                (21)
where c and θ0 are constants. Thus the trajectories are circles, with center at the origin,
that are traversed clockwise if μ > 0 and counterclockwise if μ < 0. A complete
circuit about the origin is made in a time interval of length 2π/μ, so all solutions are
periodic with period 2π/μ. The critical point is called a center.
   In general, when the eigenvalues are pure imaginary, it is possible to show (see
Problem 19) that the trajectories are ellipses centered at the origin. A typical situation
is shown in Figure 9.1.7, which also includes some typical graphs of x1 versus t. See
also Example 3 in Section 7.6, especially Figures 7.6.3 and 7.6.4.
             x2                         x1
                               x1                                                                t
              (a)                                                 (b)
      FIGURE 9.1.7 A center; r1 = iμ, r2 = −iμ. (a) The phase plane. (b) x1 versus t.
   By reflecting on these five cases and by examining the corresponding figures, we
can make several observations:
1. After a long time, each individual trajectory exhibits one of only three types of behavior. As
    t → ∞, each trajectory approaches the critical point x = 0, repeatedly traverses a closed
    curve (corresponding to a periodic solution) that surrounds the critical point, or becomes
    unbounded.
2. Viewed as a whole, the pattern of trajectories in each case is relatively simple. To be
    more specific, through each point (x0 , y0 ) in the phase plane there is only one trajectory;
    thus the trajectories do not cross each other. Do not be misled by the figures, in which
    it sometimes appears that many trajectories pass through the critical point x = 0. In fact,
    the only solution passing through the origin is the equilibrium solution x = 0. The other
    solutions that appear to pass through the origin actually only approach this point as t → ∞
    or t → −∞.
3. In each case, the set of all trajectories is such that one of three situations occurs.
    (a) All trajectories approach the critical point x = 0 as t → ∞. This is the case if the
           eigenvalues are real and negative or complex with negative real part. The origin is
           either a nodal sink or a spiral sink.
    (b) All trajectories remain bounded but do not approach the origin as t → ∞. This is the
           case if the eigenvalues are pure imaginary. The origin is a center.
    (c)   Some trajectories, and possibly all trajectories except x = 0, become unbounded as
           t → ∞.This is the case if at least one of the eigenvalues is positive or if the eigenvalues
           have positive real part. The origin is a nodal source, a spiral source, or a saddle point.
   The situations described in 3(a), (b), and (c) above illustrate the concepts of asymp-
totic stability, stability, and instability, respectively, of the equilibrium solution x = 0
of the system (2). The precise definitions of these terms are given in Section 9.2,
but their basic meaning should be clear from the geometrical discussion in this sec-
tion. The information that we have obtained about the system (2) is summarized in
Table 9.1.1. Also see Problems 20 and 21.
         TABLE 9.1.1 Stability Properties of Linear Systems x = Ax with
         det(A − rI) = 0 and det A  = 0
             Eigenvalues            Type of Critical Point                   Stability
         r1 > r 2 > 0             Node                               Unstable
         r1 < r 2 < 0             Node                               Asymptotically stable
         r2 < 0 < r1              Saddle point                       Unstable
         r1 = r2 > 0              Proper or improper node            Unstable
         r1 = r 2 < 0             Proper or improper node            Asymptotically stable
         r1 , r2 = λ ± iμ         Spiral point
             λ>0                                                     Unstable
             λ<0                                                     Asymptotically stable
         r1 = iμ, r2 = −iμ        Center                             Stable
   The analysis in this section applies only to second order systems x = Ax whose
solutions can be visualized as curves in the phase plane. A similar, though more
complicated, analysis can be carried out for an nth order system, with an n × n
coefficient matrix A, whose solutions are represented geometrically by curves in
an n-dimensional phase space. The cases that can occur in higher order systems are
essentially combinations of those we have seen in two dimensions. For instance, in
a third order system with a three-dimensional phase space, one possibility is that
solutions in a certain plane may spiral toward the origin, while other solutions may
tend to infinity along a line transverse to this plane. This will be the case if the coef-
ficient matrix has two complex eigenvalues with negative real part and one positive
real eigenvalue. However, because of their complexity, we will not discuss systems of
higher than second order.
PROBLEMS For each of the systems in Problems 1 through 12:
         (a) Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
         (b) Classify the critical point (0, 0) as to type, and determine whether it is stable, asymptotically
         stable, or unstable.
         (c) Sketch several trajectories in the phase plane, and also sketch some typical graphs of x1
         versus t.
         (d) Use a computer to plot accurately the curves requested in part (c).
                                                                               
              dx       3 −2                                        dx       5 −1
          1.      =              x                              2.      =            x
              dt       2 −2                                         dt      3    1
                                                                                
              dx       2 −1                                        dx       1 −4
          3.      =              x                              4.      =            x
              dt       3 −2                                         dt      4 −7
                                                                                
              dx       1 −5                                        dx       2 −5
          5.      =              x                              6.      =            x
              dt       1 −3                                         dt      1 −2
                                                                                     
              dx       3 −2                                        dx       −1 −1
          7.      =              x                              8.      =                 x
              dt       4 −1                                         dt        0 −0.25
                                                                                  
              dx       3 −4                                        dx         1    2
          9.      =              x                             10.      =              x
              dt       1 −1                                         dt      −5 −1
                                                                                
              dx       −1      0                                   dx       2 − 25
         11.      =                x                           12.      = 9          x
              dt         0 −1                                       dt
                                                                            5
                                                                                −1
         In each of Problems 13 through 16, determine the critical point x = x0 , and then classify its
         type and examine its stability by making the transformation x = x0 + u.
                                                                                      
              dx       1    1         2                            dx       −2     1        −2
         13.      =              x−                            14.      =              x+
              dt       1 −1           0                             dt        1 −2           1
                                     
              dx       −1 −1            −1
         15.      =                x+
              dt         2 −1              5
                                    
              dx       0 −β              α
         16.      =              x+          ;      α, β, γ, δ > 0
              dt       δ    0         −γ
         17. The equation of motion of a spring–mass system with damping (see Section 3.7) is
                                                      d2 u      du
                                                   m       +c      + ku = 0,
                                                      dt 2      dt
             where m, c, and k are positive. Write this second order equation as a system of two first
             order equations for x = u, y = du/dt. Show that x = 0, y = 0 is a critical point,and analyze
             the nature and stability of the critical point as a function of the parameters m, c, and k. A
             similar analysis can be applied to the electric circuit equation (see Section 3.7)
                                                     d2 I      dI     1
                                                  L        +R      + I = 0.
                                                     dt 2      dt    C
18. Consider the system x = Ax, and suppose that A has one zero eigenvalue.
    (a) Show that det(A) = 0.
    (b) Show that x = 0 is a critical point and that, in addition, every point on a certain straight
    line through the origin is also a critical point.
    (c) Let r1 = 0 and r2  = 0, and let ξ (1) and ξ (2) be corresponding eigenvectors. Show that
    the trajectories are as indicated in Figure 9.1.8. What is the direction of motion on the
    trajectories?
                                               x2
                                                       ξ(1)
                                         ξ(2)
                                                                             x1
            FIGURE 9.1.8      Nonisolated critical points; r1 = 0, r2  = 0. Every point
                           on the line through ξ (1) is a critical point.
19. In this problem we indicate how to show that the trajectories are ellipses when the
    eigenvalues are pure imaginary. Consider the system
                                                           
                                        x         a11     a12    x
                                              =                      .                            (i)
                                        y         a21     a22    y
    (a) Show that the eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix are pure imaginary if and only if
                                a11 + a22 = 0,        a11 a22 − a12 a21 > 0.                     (ii)
    (b) The trajectories of the system (i) can be found by converting Eqs. (i) into the single
    equation
                                     dy       dy/dt      a21 x + a22 y
                                          =          =                 .                        (iii)
                                     dx       dx/dt      a11 x + a12 y
    Use the first of Eqs. (ii) to show that Eq. (iii) is exact.
    (c) By integrating Eq. (iii), show that
                                     a21 x2 + 2a22 xy − a12 y2 = k,                             (iv)
    where k is a constant. Use Eqs. (ii) to conclude that the graph of Eq. (iv) is always an
    ellipse.
    Hint: What is the discriminant of the quadratic form in Eq. (iv)?
20. Consider the linear system
                                dx/dt = a11 x + a12 y,                      dy/dt = a21 x + a22 y,
    where a11 , a12 , a21 , and a22 are real constants. Let p = a11 + a22 , q = a11 a22 − a12 a21 , and
     = p2 − 4q. Observe that p and q are the trace and determinant, respectively, of the
    coefficient matrix of the given system. Show that the critical point (0, 0) is a
    (a) Node if q > 0 and  ≥ 0;                   (b) Saddle point if q < 0;
    (c) Spiral point if p  = 0 and  < 0;         (d) Center if p = 0 and q > 0.
    Hint: These conclusions can be reached by studying the eigenvalues r1 and r2 . It may also
    be helpful to establish, and then to use, the relations r1 r2 = q and r1 + r2 = p.
21. Continuing Problem 20, show that the critical point (0, 0) is
    (a) Asymptotically stable if q > 0 and p < 0;
    (b) Stable if q > 0 and p = 0;
    (c) Unstable if q < 0 or p > 0.
    The results of Problems 20 and 21 are summarized visually in Figure 9.1.9.
                                                                    q
                    Asymp. stable, spiral point       Unstable, spiral point
                                               Stable
                                               center                                                           s
                                                                                                              no      Δ = p2 – 4q = 0
                            i                                                                                   de
                         or                                                                               er
                      er
                    op
                                                                                                         op
    Asymp. stable Pr                                                                                     pr          Unstable
        node              m
                                ro                             Δ = p2 – 4q < 0                   rim                  node
                            p
                                   p                                                                 o
                                       er                                                   p   er
                                            no                                           ro
                                                 de                                  P
                                                      s
                                                                                                                                    p
                                                          Unstable, saddle point
                                       Δ = p2 – 4q > 0
                                        FIGURE 9.1.9                    Stability diagram.
22. In this problem we illustrate how a 2 × 2 system with eigenvalues λ ± iμ can be
    transformed into the system (11). Consider the system in Problem 12:
                                                                            
                                                           
                                                                    2   −2.5
                                                          x =                    x = Ax.                                            (i)
                                                                  1.8     −1
    (a) Show that the eigenvalues of this system are r1 = 0.5 + 1.5i and r2 = 0.5 − 1.5i.
    (b) Show that the eigenvector corresponding to r1 can be chosen as
                                                       
                               (1)       5         5          0
                              ξ =              =       +i        .                        (ii)
                                       3 − 3i      3        −3
                  (c) Let P be the matrix whose columns are the real and imaginary parts of ξ (1) . Thus
                                                                      
                                                               5    0
                                                        P=               .                               (iii)
                                                               3 −3
                  Let x = Py and substitute for x in Eq. (i). Show that
                                                        y = (P−1AP)y.                                   (iv)
                  (d) Find P−1 and show that
                                                                           
                                                     −1
                                                                 0.5    1.5
                                                  P AP =                      .                           (v)
                                                                −1.5    0.5
                  Thus Eq. (v) has the form of Eq. (11).
9.2 Autonomous Systems and Stability
             In this section we begin to draw together, and to expand on, the geometrical ideas
             introduced in Section 2.5 for certain first order equations and in Section 9.1 for
             systems of two first order linear homogeneous equations with constant coefficients.
             These ideas concern the qualitative study of differential equations and the concept
             of stability, an idea that will be defined precisely later in this section.
             Autonomous Systems. We are concerned with systems of two simultaneous differential
             equations of the form
                                        dx/dt = F(x, y),         dy/dt = G(x, y).                        (1)
             We assume that the functions F and G are continuous and have continuous partial
             derivatives in some domain D of the xy-plane. If (x0 , y0 ) is a point in this domain,
             then by Theorem 7.1.1 there exists a unique solution x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) of the system
             (1) satisfying the initial conditions
                                              x(t0 ) = x0 ,      y(t0 ) = y0 .                           (2)
             The solution is defined in some time interval I that contains the point t0 .
                Frequently, we will write the initial value problem (1), (2) in the vector form
                                            dx/dt = f(x),         x(t0 ) = x0 ,                          (3)
             where x = (x, y) , f(x) = (F(x, y), G(x, y)) , and x = (x0 , y0 ) . In this case the solu-
                                T                             T         0         T
             tion is expressed as x = φ(t), where φ(t) = (φ(t), ψ(t))T . As usual, we interpret a
             solution x = φ(t) as a curve traced by a moving point in the xy-plane, the phase
             plane.
                Observe that the functions F and G in Eqs. (1) do not depend on the independent
             variable t, but only on the dependent variables x and y. A system with this property
             is said to be autonomous. The system
                                                         x = Ax,                                        (4)
where A is a constant 2 × 2 matrix, is a simple example of a two-dimensional
autonomous system. On the other hand, if one or more of the elements of the
coefficient matrix A is a function of the independent variable t, then the system
is nonautonomous. The distinction between autonomous and nonautonomous sys-
tems is important, because the geometrical qualitative analysis in Section 9.1 can be
effectively extended to two-dimensional autonomous systems in general but is not
nearly as useful for nonautonomous systems.
    In particular, the autonomous system (1) has an associated direction field that is
independent of time. Consequently, there is only one trajectory passing through each
point (x0 , y0 ) in the phase plane. In other words, all solutions that satisfy an initial
condition of the form (2) lie on the same trajectory, regardless of the time t0 at which
they pass through (x0 , y0 ). Thus, just as for the constant coefficient linear system (4),
a single phase portrait simultaneously displays important qualitative information
about all solutions of the system (1). We will see this fact confirmed repeatedly in
this chapter.
   Autonomous systems occur frequently in applications. Physically, an autonomous
system is one whose configuration, including physical parameters and external forces
or effects,is independent of time.The response of the system to given initial conditions
is then independent of the time at which the conditions are imposed.
Stability and Instability. The concepts of stability, asymptotic stability, and instability
have already been mentioned several times in this book. It is now time to give a
precise mathematical definition of these concepts, at least for autonomous systems
of the form
                                          x = f(x).                                   (5)
In the following definitions, and elsewhere, we use the notation x to designate the
length, or magnitude, of the vector x.
   The points, if any, where f(x) = 0 are called critical points of the autonomous
system (5). At such points x = 0 also, so critical points correspond to constant, or
equilibrium, solutions of the system of differential equations. A critical point x0 of
the system (5) is said to be stable if, given any  > 0, there is a δ > 0 such that every
solution x = φ(t) of the system (1), which at t = 0 satisfies
                                      φ(0) − x0  < δ,                                (6)
exists for all positive t and satisfies
                                      φ(t) − x0  <                                  (7)
for all t ≥ 0. This is illustrated geometrically in Figures 9.2.1a and 9.2.1b. These
mathematical statements say that all solutions that start “sufficiently close” (that
is, within the distance δ) to x0 stay “close” (within the distance ) to x0 . Note that in
Figure 9.2.1a the trajectory is within the circle x − x0  = δ at t = 0 and, although
it soon passes outside of this circle, it remains within the circle x − x0  =  for all
t ≥ 0. However, the trajectory of the solution does not have to approach the critical
point x0 as t → ∞; it only has to remain within the circle of radius , as illustrated in
Figure 9.2.1b. A critical point that is not stable is said to be unstable.
             y                                    y
                                 δ                                  δ
                                                    (φ (0), ψ (0))
                 (φ (0), ψ (0))
                                            x                                     x
                                (a)                                (b)
                     FIGURE 9.2.1    (a) Asymptotic stability. (b) Stability.
   A critical point x0 is said to be asymptotically stable if it is stable and if there exists
a δ0 (δ0 > 0) such that if a solution x = φ(t) satisfies
                                      φ(0) − x0  < δ0 ,                                 (8)
then
                                        lim φ(t) = x0 .                                   (9)
                                       t→∞
Thus trajectories that start “sufficiently close” to x0 not only must stay “close” but
must eventually approach x0 as t → ∞. This is the case for the trajectory in Figure
9.2.1a, but not for the one in Figure 9.2.1b. Note that asymptotic stability is a stronger
property than stability, since a critical point must be stable before we can even con-
sider whether it might be asymptotically stable. On the other hand, the limit condition
(9), which is an essential feature of asymptotic stability, does not by itself imply even
ordinary stability. Indeed, examples can be constructed in which all the trajectories
approach x0 as t → ∞, but for which x0 is not a stable critical point. Geometrically,
all that is needed is a family of trajectories having members that start arbitrarily close
to x0 and then depart an arbitrarily large distance before eventually approaching x0
as t → ∞.
   In this chapter we are concentrating on systems of two equations,but the definitions
just given are independent of the size of the system. If you interpret the vectors in
Eqs. (5) through (9) as n-dimensional, then the definitions of stability, asymptotic
stability, and instability apply also to systems of n equations. The concepts expressed
in these definitions can be seen more clearly by interpreting them in terms of a specific
physical problem.
The Oscillating Pendulum. The concepts of asymptotic stability, stability, and instability
can be easily visualized in terms of an oscillating pendulum. Consider the configura-
tion shown in Figure 9.2.2, in which a mass m is attached to one end of a rigid, but
weightless, rod of length L. The other end of the rod is supported at the origin O,
and the rod is free to rotate in the plane of the paper. The position of the pendu-
lum is described by the angle θ between the rod and the downward vertical direction,
with the counterclockwise direction taken as positive. The gravitational force mg acts
downward, while the damping force c|dθ/dt|, where c is positive, is always opposite to
the direction of motion. We assume that both θ and dθ/dt are positive. The equation
of motion can be quickly derived from the principle of angular momentum, which
states that the time rate of change of angular momentum about any point is equal
to the moment of the resultant force about that point. The angular momentum about
the origin is mL2 (dθ/dt), so the governing equation is
                                   d2 θ         dθ
                            mL2         = −cL       − mgL sin θ.                     (10)
                                   dt 2         dt
The factors L and L sin θ on the right side of Eq. (10) are the moment arms of
the resistive force and of the gravitational force, respectively; the minus signs are due
to the fact that the two forces tend to make the pendulum rotate in the clockwise
(negative) direction. You should verify, as an exercise, that the same equation is
obtained for the other three possible sign combinations of θ and dθ/dt.
                           O
                               θ
                                           L
                                                          c dθ /dt
                                                  m
                                                       L(1 – cos θ )
                                      L sin θ
                                                  mg
                        FIGURE 9.2.2 An oscillating pendulum.
   By straightforward algebraic operations, we can write Eq. (10) in the standard form
                               d2 θ      c dθ      g
                                  2
                                     +          + sin θ = 0,                         (11)
                               dt       mL dt      L
or
                                d2 θ       dθ
                                    2
                                      +γ       + ω2 sin θ = 0,                       (12)
                                 dt        dt
where γ = c/mL and ω2 = g/L. To convert Eq. (12) to a system of two first order
equations, we let x = θ and y = dθ/dt; then
                           dx               dy
                               = y,            = −ω2 sin x − γy.                     (13)
                            dt              dt
Since γ and ω2 are constants, the system (13) is an autonomous system of the
form (1).
  The critical points of Eqs. (13) are found by solving the equations
                             y = 0,        −ω2 sin x − γy = 0.
We obtain y = 0 and x = ±nπ, where n is an integer. These points correspond to two
physical equilibrium positions, one with the mass directly below the point of support
(θ = 0) and the other with the mass directly above the point of support (θ = π). Our
intuition suggests that the first is stable and the second is unstable.
   More precisely, if the mass is slightly displaced from the lower equilibrium posi-
tion, it will oscillate back and forth with gradually decreasing amplitude, eventually
converging to the equilibrium position as the initial potential energy is dissipated by
the damping force. This type of motion illustrates asymptotic stability and is shown
in Figure 9.2.3a.
                  (a)                       (b)                               (c)
          FIGURE 9.2.3 Qualitative motion of a pendulum. (a) With air resistance.
                 (b) With or without air resistance. (c) Without air resistance.
   On the other hand, if the mass is slightly displaced from the upper equilib-
rium position, it will rapidly fall, under the influence of gravity, and will ultimately
converge to the lower equilibrium position in this case also. This type of motion
illustrates instability. See Figure 9.2.3b. In practice, it is impossible to maintain the
pendulum in its upward equilibrium position for any extended length of time with-
out an external constraint mechanism, since the slightest perturbation will cause the
mass to fall.
   Finally, consider the ideal situation in which the damping coefficient c (or γ) is
zero. In this case, if the mass is displaced slightly from its lower equilibrium position,
it will oscillate indefinitely with constant amplitude about the equilibrium position.
Since there is no dissipation in the system, the mass will remain near the equilib-
rium position but will not approach it asymptotically. This type of motion is stable
but not asymptotically stable, as indicated in Figure 9.2.3c. In general, this motion is
impossible to achieve experimentally, because the slightest degree of air resistance
or friction at the point of support will eventually cause the pendulum to converge to
its rest position.
   Solutions of the pendulum equations are discussed in more detail in the next
section.
The Importance of Critical Points. Critical points correspond to equilibrium solutions—
that is, solutions for which x(t) and y(t) are constant. For such a solution, the system
described by x and y is not changing; it remains in its initial state forever. It might
seem reasonable to conclude that such points are not very interesting. Recall, how-
ever, that for linear homogeneous systems with constant coefficients, x = Ax, the
nature of the critical point at the origin determines to a large extent the behavior of
trajectories throughout the xy-plane.
   For nonlinear autonomous systems this is no longer true, for at least two reasons.
First, there may be several, or many, critical points that are competing, so to speak,
for influence on the trajectories. Second, the nonlinearities in the system are also of
        great importance, especially far away from the critical points. Nevertheless, critical
        points of nonlinear autonomous systems can be classified just as for linear systems.
        We will discuss this in detail in Section 9.3. Here we illustrate how it can be done
        graphically, assuming that you have software that can construct direction fields and
        perhaps plot good numerical approximations to a few trajectories.
        Consider the system
EXAMPLE
                               dx/dt = −(x − y)(1 − x − y),         dy/dt = x(2 + y).                     (14)
   1
        Find the critical points for this system, and draw direction fields on rectangles containing the
        critical points. By inspecting the direction fields, classify each critical point as to type, and state
        whether it is asymptotically stable, stable, or unstable.
           The critical points are found by solving the algebraic equations
                                      (x − y)(1 − x − y) = 0,      x(2 + y) = 0.                          (15)
        One way to satisfy the second equation is by choosing x = 0. Then the first equation becomes
        y(1 − y) = 0, so y = 0 or y = 1. More solutions can be found by choosing y = −2 in the second
        equation. Then the first equation becomes (x + 2)(3 − x) = 0, so x = −2 or x = 3. Thus we
        have obtained the four critical points (0, 0), (0, 1), (−2, −2), and (3, −2).
           Figure 9.2.4 shows a direction field containing the first two of the critical points. Comparing
        this figure with those in Section 9.1 and in Chapter 7 should make it clear that the origin is
        a saddle point and that (0, 1) is a spiral point. Of course, the saddle point is unstable. The
        trajectories near the spiral point appear to be approaching this point, so we conclude that it is
        asymptotically stable. A direction field for the other two critical points is shown in Figure 9.2.5.
        Each of these points is a node. The arrows point toward the point (−2, −2) and away from the
        point (3, −2); thus the former is asymptotically stable and the latter is unstable.
                               y                                               y
                               2
                                                             –3    –2    –1            1     2     3     4 x
                                                                            –1.6
                             1.5
                               1                                            –1.8
                             0.5                                              –2
         –1        –0.5                    0.5        1 x                   –2.2
                            –0.5
                                                                            –2.4
                              –1
            FIGURE 9.2.4 Direction field for the                 FIGURE 9.2.5 Direction field for the
               system (14) containing the critical             system (14) containing the critical points
             points (0, 0) and (0, 1); the former is a        (−2, −2) and (3, −2); both of these points
          saddle point and the latter is a spiral point.                        are nodes.
           For a two-dimensional autonomous system with at least one asymptotically stable
        critical point, it is often of interest to determine where in the phase plane the tra-
        jectories lie that ultimately approach a given critical point. Let P be a point in the
        xy-plane with the property that a trajectory passing through P ultimately approaches
        the critical point as t → ∞. Then this trajectory is said to be attracted by the critical
        point. Further, the set of all such points P is called the basin of attraction or the
        region of asymptotic stability of the critical point. A trajectory that bounds a basin
        of attraction is called a separatrix because it separates trajectories that approach
        a particular critical point from other trajectories that do not do so. Determination
        of basins of attraction is important in understanding the large-scale behavior of the
        solutions of an autonomous system.
        Consider again the system (14) from Example 1. Describe the basin of attraction for each of
EXAMPLE the asymptotically stable critical points.
   2       Figure 9.2.6 shows a phase portrait for this system with a direction field in the background.
        Observe that there are two trajectories that approach the saddle point at the origin as t → ∞,
        One of these lies in the fourth quadrant and is almost a straight line from the unstable node
        at (3, −2). The other also originates at the unstable node, then passes into the first quadrant,
        loops around the spiral point, and ultimately approaches the saddle point through the second
        quadrant. These two trajectories are separatrices; the region between them (but not including
        the separatrices themselves) is the basin of attraction for the spiral point at (0, 1). This region
        is shaded in Figure 9.2.6.
                                                       y
                                                       4
                                                       2
                             –4           –2                           2         4 x
                                                      –2
                    FIGURE 9.2.6 Trajectories of the system (14). The basis of attraction
                                       for the spiral point (0, 1) is shaded.
           The basin of attraction for the asymptotically stable node at (−2, −2) consists of the rest of
        the xy-plane, with only a handful of exceptions. The separatrices approach the saddle point, as
        we have noted already, rather than the node. The saddle point itself and the unstable node are
        equilibrium solutions and thus remain fixed for all time. Finally, there is a trajectory lying on
        the line y = −2 for x > 3 on which the direction of motion is always to the right; this trajectory
        also does not approach the point (−2, −2).
           Figures 9.2.4, 9.2.5, and 9.2.6 show that in the immediate vicinity of a critical point,
        the direction field and pattern of trajectories resemble those for a linear system with
        constant coefficients. This becomes even more unmistakable if you use your software
        to zoom in closer and closer to a critical point. Thus we have visual evidence that a
        nonlinear system behaves very much like a linear system, at least in the neighborhood
        of a critical point. We will pursue this idea in the next section.
        Determination of Trajectories. The trajectories of a two-dimensional autonomous system
                                    dx/dt = F(x, y),          dy/dt = G(x, y)                     (16)
        can sometimes be found by solving a related first order differential equation. From
        Eqs. (16) we have
                                            dy       dy/dt     G(x, y)
                                                 =          =           ,                         (17)
                                            dx       dx/dt     F(x, y)
        which is a first order equation in the variables x and y. Observe that such a reduction
        is not usually possible if F and G depend also on t. If Eq. (17) can be solved by any
        of the methods of Chapter 2, and if we write solutions (implicitly) in the form
                                                   H(x, y) = c,                                   (18)
        then Eq. (18) is an equation for the trajectories of the system (16). In other words, the
        trajectories lie on the level curves of H(x, y). Keep in mind that there is no general
        way of solving Eq. (17) to obtain the function H, so this approach is applicable only
        in special cases.
        Find the trajectories of the system
EXAMPLE
                                           dx/dt = y,        dy/dt = x.                            (19)
   3
           In this case, Eq. (17) becomes
                                                       dy    x
                                                           = .                                     (20)
                                                       dx    y
        This equation is separable since it can be written as
                                                     y dy = x dx,
        and its solutions are given by
                                               H(x, y) = y2 − x2 = c,                              (21)
        where c is arbitrary. Therefore, the trajectories of the system (19) are the hyperbolas shown
        in Figure 9.2.7. The direction of motion on the trajectories can be inferred from the fact that
        both dx/dt and dy dt are positive in the first quadrant. The only critical point is the saddle
        point at the origin.
           Another way to obtain the trajectories is to solve the system (19) by the methods of
        Section 7.5. We omit the details, but the result is
                                      x = c1 et + c2 e−t ,   y = c1 et − c2 e−t .
        Eliminating t between these two equations again leads to Eq. (21).
                                                        y
                                                        2
                                                        1
                     –2               –1                0                1                2  x
                                                       –1
                                                       –2
                 FIGURE 9.2.7 Trajectories of the system (19); the origin is a saddle point.
        Find the trajectories of the system
EXAMPLE
                                        dx                  dy
   4                                     dt
                                             = 4 − 2y,
                                                            dt
                                                               = 12 − 3x2 .                        (22)
           From the equations
                                           4 − 2y = 0,      12 − 3x2 = 0
        we find that the critical points of the system (22) are the points (−2, 2) and (2, 2). To
        determine the trajectories, note that for this system, Eq. (17) becomes
                                                  dy     12 − 3x2
                                                     =            .                                (23)
                                                  dx      4 − 2y
        Separating the variables in Eq. (23) and integrating, we find that solutions satisfy
                                        H(x, y) = 4y − y2 − 12x + x3 = c,                          (24)
        where c is an arbitrary constant. A computer plotting routine is helpful in displaying the
        level curves of H(x, y), some of which are shown in Figure 9.2.8. The direction of motion
        on the trajectories can be determined by drawing a direction field for the system (22), or
        by evaluating dx/dt and dy/dt at one or two selected points. From Figure 9.2.8 you can
        see that the critical point (2, 2) is a saddle point and the point (−2, 2) is a center. Observe
        that there is a separatrix (shown in black) that leaves the saddle point (as t → −∞), loops
        around the center, and returns to the saddle point (as t → +∞). Within the separatrix are
        closed trajectories, or periodic solutions, that surround the center. Outside the separatrix,
        trajectories become unbounded, except for the trajectory that enters the saddle point from
        the right.
                                                           y
                                                               8
                                                               6
                                                               4
                                                               2
                         –4               –2                               2              4
                                                                                              x
                                                               –2
                                                               –4
                  FIGURE 9.2.8 Trajectories of the system (22). The point (−2, 2) is a center,
                      and the point (2, 2) is a saddle point. The black curve is a separatrix.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4, sketch the trajectory corresponding to the solution satisfying
         the specified initial conditions, and indicate the direction of motion for increasing t.
          1. dx/dt = −x,         dy/dt = −2y;         x(0) = 4, y(0) = 2
           2. dx/dt = −x,        dy/dt = 2y;       x(0) = 4,    y(0) = 2  and   x(0) = 4,   y(0) = 0
           3. dx/dt = −y,        dy/dt = x;       x(0) = 4,    y(0) = 0  and   x(0) = 0, y(0) = 4
                                                                                √
           4. dx/dt = ay,       dy/dt = −bx,         a > 0,   b > 0;     x(0) = a, y(0) = 0
         For each of the systems in Problems 5 through 16:
         (a) Find all the critical points (equilibrium solutions).
         (b) Use a computer to draw a direction field and phase portrait for the system.
         (c) From the plot(s) in part (b), determine whether each critical point is asymptotically stable,
         stable, or unstable, and classify it as to type.
         (d) Describe the basin of attraction for each asymptotically stable critical point.
           5. dx/dt = x − xy,       dy/dt = y + 2xy
          6. dx/dt = 1 + 2y,        dy/dt = 1 − 3x2
          7. dx/dt = 2x − x − xy,
                              2
                                           dy/dt = 3y − 2y2 − 3xy
          8. dx/dt = −(2 + y)(x + y),          dy/dt = −y(1 − x)
          9. dx/dt = y(2 − x − y),        dy/dt = −x − y − 2xy
         10. dx/dt = (2 + x)(y − x),         dy/dt = y(2 + x − x2 )
         11. dx/dt = −x + 2xy,         dy/dt = y − x2 − y2
         12. dx/dt = y,        dy/dt = x − 16 x3 − 15 y
         13. dx/dt = (2 + x)(y − x),         dy/dt = (4 − x)(y + x)
         14. dx/dt = (2 − x)(y − x),         dy/dt = y(2 − x − x2 )
         15. dx/dt = x(2 − x − y),        dy/dt = −x + 3y − 2xy
         16. dx/dt = x(2 − x − y),        dy/dt = (1 − y)(2 + x)
In each of Problems 17 through 24:
(a) Find an equation of the form H(x, y) = c satisfied by the trajectories.
(b) Plot several level curves of the function H. These are trajectories of the given system.
Indicate the direction of motion on each trajectory.
17. dx/dt = 2y,            dy/dt = 8x
18. dx/dt = 2y,            dy/dt = −8x
19. dx/dt = y,           dy/dt = 2x + y
20. dx/dt = −x + y,             dy/dt = −x − y
21. dx/dt = −x + y + x2 ,              dy/dt = y − 2xy
22. dx/dt = 2x y − 3x − 4y,
                    2         2
                                           dy/dt = −2xy2 + 6xy
23. Undamped pendulum: dx/dt = y,                   dy/dt = − sin x
24. Duffing’s2 equations: dx/dt = y,               dy/dt = −x + (x3 /6)
25. Given that x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) is a solution of the autonomous system
                                       dx/dt = F(x, y),     dy/dt = G(x, y)
     for α < t < β, show that x = (t) = φ(t − s), y = (t) = ψ(t − s) is a solution for
     α + s < t < β + s for any real number s.
26. Prove that for the system
                                       dx/dt = F(x, y),     dy/dt = G(x, y)
     there is at most one trajectory passing through a given point (x0 , y0 ).
     Hint: Let C0 be the trajectory generated by the solution x = φ0 (t), y = ψ0 (t), with
     φ0 (t0 ) = x0 , ψ0 (t0 ) = y0 , and let C1 be the trajectory generated by the solution x = φ1 (t),
     y = ψ1 (t), with φ1 (t1 ) = x0 , ψ1 (t1 ) = y0 . Use the fact that the system is autonomous, and
     also the existence and uniqueness theorem, to show that C0 and C1 are the same.
27. Prove that if a trajectory starts at a noncritical point of the system
                                      dx/dt = F(x, y),      dy/dt = G(x, y),
     then it cannot reach a critical point (x0 , y0 ) in a finite length of time.
     Hint: Assume the contrary; that is, assume that the solution x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) satisfies
     φ(a) = x0 , ψ(a) = y0 . Then use the fact that x = x0 , y = y0 is a solution of the given system
     satisfying the initial condition x = x0 , y = y0 at t = a.
28. Assuming that the trajectory corresponding to a solution x = φ(t), y = ψ(t), −∞ < t < ∞,
     of an autonomous system is closed, show that the solution is periodic.
     Hint: Since the trajectory is closed, there exists at least one point (x0 , y0 ) such that
     φ(t0 ) = x0 , ψ(t0 ) = y0 and a number T > 0 such that φ(t0 + T) = x0 , ψ(t0 + T) = y0 . Show
     that x = (t) = φ(t + T) and y = (t) = ψ(t + T) is a solution, and then use the existence
     and uniqueness theorem to show that (t) = φ(t) and (t) = ψ(t) for all t.
2 Georg   Duffing (1861–1944), a German engineer, was a pioneer in the study of the oscillations
of nonlinear mechanical systems. His most important work was the influential monograph Erzwungene
Schwingungen bei veränderlicher Eigenfrequenz und ihre technische Bedeutung, published in 1918.
9.3 Locally Linear Systems
                In Section 9.1 we described the stability properties of the equilibrium solution x = 0
                of the two-dimensional linear system
                                                           x = Ax.                                      (1)
                The results are summarized in Table 9.1.1. Recall that we required that det A = 0,
                so x = 0 is the only critical point of the system (1). Now that we have defined the
                concepts of asymptotic stability, stability, and instability more precisely, we can restate
                these results in the following theorem.
 Theorem 9.3.1  The critical point x = 0 of the linear system (1) is asymptotically stable if the eigen-
                values r1 , r2 are real and negative or have negative real part; is stable, but not
                asymptotically stable, if r1 and r2 are pure imaginary; and is unstable if r1 and r2 are
                real and either is positive, or if they have positive real part.
                Effect of Small Perturbations. It is apparent from this theorem or from Table 9.1.1 that
                the eigenvalues r1 , r2 of the coefficient matrix A determine the type of critical point
                at x = 0 and its stability characteristics. In turn, the values of r1 and r2 depend on
                the coefficients in the system (1). When such a system arises in some applied field, the
                coefficients usually result from the measurements of certain physical quantities. Such
                measurements are often subject to small uncertainties, so it is of interest to investigate
                whether small changes (perturbations) in the coefficients can affect the stability or
                instability of a critical point and/or significantly alter the pattern of trajectories.
                    Recall that the eigenvalues r1 , r2 are the roots of the polynomial equation
                                                       det(A − rI) = 0.                                  (2)
                It is possible to show that small perturbations in some or all the coefficients are
                reflected in small perturbations in the eigenvalues. The most sensitive situation
                occurs when r1 = iμ and r2 = −iμ. Then the critical point is a center and the tra-
                jectories are closed curves (ellipses) surrounding it. If a slight change is made in the
                coefficients, then the eigenvalues r1 and r2 will take on new values r1 = λ + iμ and
                r2 = λ − iμ , where λ is small in magnitude and μ ∼ = μ (see Figure 9.3.1). If λ = 0,
                which almost always occurs, then the trajectories of the perturbed system are spi-
                rals rather than ellipses. The system is asymptotically stable if λ < 0 but unstable if
                λ > 0. Thus, in the case of a center, small perturbations in the coefficients may well
                change a stable system into an unstable one and, in any case, may be expected to
                change the trajectories from ellipses to spirals (see Problem 27).
                    Another slightly less sensitive case occurs if the eigenvalues r1 and r2 are equal; in
                this case the critical point is a node. Small perturbations in the coefficients will nor-
                mally cause the two equal roots to separate (bifurcate). If the separated roots are real,
                then the critical point of the perturbed system remains a node, but if the separated
                roots are complex conjugates, then the critical point becomes a spiral point. These
                two possibilities are shown schematically in Figure 9.3.2. In this case the stability or
                instability of the system is not affected by small perturbations in the coefficients, but
                the type of the critical point may be changed (see Problem 28).
                 μ                                                        μ
                              r1' = λ' + iμ '
                                                                            r1 = iμ
                     r1 = iμ                         r1' = λ' + iμ '
                                                λ    r2' = λ' – iμ '                           λ
                     r2 = –iμ                                               r2 = –iμ
                              r2' = λ' – i μ'
                FIGURE 9.3.1            Schematic perturbation of r1 = iμ, r2 = −iμ.
                  μ                                           μ
                                                                                r 1' = λ + iμ
                                r1 = r 2
                         r 1'              r 2'      λ            r1 = r 2                  λ
                                                                                r 2' = λ – i μ
                      FIGURE 9.3.2              Schematic perturbation of r1 = r2 .
   In all other cases the stability or instability of the system is not changed, nor is the
type of critical point altered, by sufficiently small perturbations in the coefficients
of the system. For example, if r1 and r2 are real, negative, and unequal, then a small
change in the coefficients will neither change the sign of r1 and r2 nor allow them to
coalesce. Thus the critical point remains an asymptotically stable node.
Linear Approximations to Nonlinear Systems. Now let us consider a nonlinear autonomous
two-dimensional system
                                                    x = f(x).                                   (3)
Our main object is to investigate the behavior of trajectories of the system (3) near a
critical point x0 . Recall that in Example 1 in Section 9.2 we noted that near each critical
point of that nonlinear system the pattern of trajectories resembles the trajectories
of a certain linear system. This suggests that near a critical point we may be able
to approximate the nonlinear system (3) by an appropriate linear system, whose
trajectories are easy to describe. The crucial question is whether and how we can
find an approximating linear system whose trajectories closely match those of the
nonlinear system near the critical point
   It is convenient to choose the critical point to be the origin. This involves no loss
of generality, since if x0  = 0, it is always possible to make the substitution u = x − x0
in Eq. (3). Then u will satisfy an autonomous system with a critical point at the origin.
   First, let us consider what it means for a nonlinear system (3) to be “close” to a
linear system (1). Accordingly, suppose that
                                                 x = Ax + g(x)                                  (4)
and that x = 0 is an isolated critical point of the system (4). This means that there
is some circle about the origin within which there are no other critical points. In
addition, we assume that det A  = 0, so that x = 0 is also an isolated critical point
of the linear system x = Ax. For the nonlinear system (4) to be close to the linear
        system x = Ax, we must assume that g(x) is small. More precisely, we assume that
        the components of g have continuous first partial derivatives and satisfy the limit
        condition
                                          g(x)/x → 0              as x → 0;                              (5)
        that is, g is small in comparison to x itself near the origin. Such a system is called
        a locally linear system in the neighborhood of the critical point x = 0.
            It may be helpful to express the condition (5) in scalar form. If we let
        xT = (x, y), then x = (x2 + y2 )1/2 = r. Similarly, if gT (x) = (g1 (x, y), g2 (x, y)),
        then g(x) = [g12 (x, y) + g22 (x, y)]1/2 . Then it follows that condition (5) is satisfied if
        and only if
                              g1 (x, y)/r → 0,            g2 (x, y)/r → 0          as r → 0.                 (6)
        Determine whether the system
EXAMPLE                                                                              
                                    x          1       0      x             −x2 − xy
   1                                y
                                         =
                                               0       0.5    y
                                                                  +
                                                                      −0.75xy − 0.25y2
                                                                                                              (7)
        is locally linear in the neighborhood of the origin.
            Observe that the system (7) is of the form (4), that (0, 0) is a critical point, and that
        det A = 0. It is not hard to show that the other critical points of Eqs. (7) are (0, 2), (1, 0),
        and (0.5, 0.5); consequently, the origin is an isolated critical point. In checking the condition
        (6), it is convenient to introduce polar coordinates by letting x = r cos θ, y = r sin θ. Then
                                  g1 (x, y)      −x2 − xy       −r 2 cos2 θ − r 2 sin θ cos θ
                                             =               =
                                      r               r                      r
                                             = −r(cos2 θ + sin θ cos θ) → 0
        as r → 0. In a similar way you can show that g2 (x, y)/r → 0 as r → 0. Hence the system (7) is
        locally linear near the origin.
        The motion of a pendulum is described by the system [see Eq. (13) of Section 9.2]
EXAMPLE
                                            dx              dy
   2                                             = y,           = −ω2 sin x − γy.                             (8)
                                            dt              dt
        The critical points are (0, 0), (±π, 0), (±2π, 0), . . . , so the origin is an isolated critical point of
        this system. Show that the system is locally linear near the origin.
            To compare Eqs. (8) with Eq. (4), we must rewrite the former so that the linear and nonlinear
        terms are clearly identified. If we write sin x = x + (sin x − x) and substitute this expression in
        the second of Eqs. (8), we obtain the equivalent system
                                                                                  
                                      x            0        1     x                0
                                           =                          −ω  2
                                                                                           .                  (9)
                                      y          −ω2 −γ           y           sin x − x
            On comparing Eq. (9) and Eq. (4), we see that g1 (x, y) = 0 and g2 (x, y) = −ω2 (sin x − x).
        From the Taylor series for sin x, we know that sin x − x behaves like −x3 /3! = −(r 3 cos3 θ)/3!
        when x is small. Consequently, (sin x − x)/r → 0 as r → 0. Thus the conditions (6) are
        satisfied, and the system (9) is locally linear near the origin.
   Let us now return to the general nonlinear system (3), which we write in the scalar
form
                                  x = F(x, y),           y = G(x, y);                                  (10)
that is, x = (x, y)T and f(x) = (F(x, y), G(x, y))T . The system (10) is locally linear in
the neighborhood of a critical point (x0 , y0 ) whenever the functions F and G have
continuous partial derivatives up to order two. To show this, we use Taylor expansions
about the point (x0 , y0 ) to write F(x, y) and G(x, y) in the form
          F(x, y) = F(x0 , y0 ) + Fx (x0 , y0 )(x − x0 ) + Fy (x0 , y0 )(y − y0 ) + η1 (x, y),
         G(x, y) = G(x0 , y0 ) + Gx (x0 , y0 )(x − x0 ) + Gy (x0 , y0 )(y − y0 ) + η2 (x, y),
where η1 (x, y)/[(x − x0 )2 + (y − y0 )2 ]1/2 → 0 as (x, y) → (x0 , y0 ), and similarly for
η2 . Note that F(x0 , y0 ) = G(x0 , y0 ) = 0, and that dx/dt = d(x − x0 )/dt and
dy/dt = d(y − y0 )/dt. Then the system (10) reduces to
                                                                                
              d x − x0            Fx (x0 , y0 ) Fy (x0 , y0 )         x − x0          η1 (x, y)
                             =                                                   +               ,       (11)
             dt y − y0            Gx (x0 , y0 ) Gy (x0 , y0 )         y − y0          η2 (x, y)
or, in vector notation,
                                         du      df 0
                                             =       (x )u + η(x),                                       (12)
                                         dt     dx
where u = (x − x0 , y − y0 )T and η = (η1 , η2 )T .
   The significance of this result is twofold. First, if the functions F and G are twice
differentiable, then the system (10) is locally linear, and it is unnecessary to resort
to the limiting process used in Examples 1 and 2. Second, the linear system that
approximates the nonlinear system (10) near (x0 , y0 ) is given by the linear part of
Eqs. (11) or (12):
                                                                           
                           d u1             Fx (x0 , y0 ) Fy (x0 , y0 )        u1
                                     =                                              ,                    (13)
                          dt u2            Gx (x0 , y0 ) Gy (x0 , y0 )         u2
where u1 = x − x0 and u2 = y − y0 . Equation (13) provides a simple and general
method for finding the linear system corresponding to a locally linear system near a
given critical point.
   The matrix                                    
                                                     Fx F y
                                            J=                    ,                                      (14)
                                                    Gx Gy
which appears as the coefficient matrix in Eq. (13), is called the Jacobian3 matrix
of the functions F and G with respect to x and y. We need to assume that det(J) is
not zero at (x0 , y0 ) so that this point is also an isolated critical point of the linear
system (13).
3 Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi (1804–1851), a German analyst who was professor and lecturer at the Uni-
versities of Königsberg and Berlin, made important contributions to the theory of elliptic functions. The
determinant of J and its extension to n functions of n variables is called the Jacobian because of his notable
paper in 1841 on the properties of this determinant. The corresponding matrix is also named for Jacobi,
even though matrices were not developed until after his death.
              Use Eq. (13) to find the linear system corresponding to the pendulum equations (8) near the
 EXAMPLE      origin; near the critical point (π, 0).
      3            In this case we have, from Eq. (8),
                                            F(x, y) = y,     G(x, y) = −ω2 sin x − γy;                        (15)
              since these functions are differentiable as many times as necessary, the system (8) is locally
              linear near each critical point. The derivatives of F and G are
                                     Fx = 0,      Fy = 1,     Gx = −ω2 cos x,        Gy = −γ.                 (16)
                   Thus, at the origin the corresponding linear system is
                                                                          
                                                   d x            0       1   x
                                                          =                       ,                           (17)
                                                  dt y        −ω2 −γ          y
              which agrees with Eq. (9).
                   Similarly, evaluating the partial derivatives in Eq. (16) at (π, 0), we obtain
                                                                        
                                                    d u         0       1    u
                                                           =                    ,                             (18)
                                                   dt v        ω2 −γ         v
              where u = x − π, v = y. This is the linear system corresponding to Eqs. (8) near the point (π, 0).
                   We now return to the locally linear system (4). Since the nonlinear term g(x) is
              small compared to the linear term Ax when x is small, it is reasonable to hope that
              the trajectories of the linear system (1) are good approximations to those of the
              nonlinear system (4), at least near the origin. This turns out to be true in many (but
              not all) cases, as the following theorem states.
Theorem 9.3.2 Let r1 and r2 be the eigenvalues of the linear system (1) corresponding to
              the locally linear system (4). Then the type and stability of the critical point
              (0, 0) of the linear system (1) and the locally linear system (4) are as shown in
              Table 9.3.1.
              TABLE 9.3.1 Stability and Instability Properties of Linear and Locally Linear Systems
                                                    Linear System                        Locally Linear System
                       r1 , r2            Type                    Stability            Type           Stability
              r1 > r2 > 0               N                     Unstable              N              Unstable
              r1 < r2 < 0               N                     Asymptotically        N              Asymptotically
                                                                 stable                              stable
              r2 < 0 < r1               SP                    Unstable              SP             Unstable
              r1 = r2 > 0               PN or IN              Unstable              N or SpP       Unstable
              r1 = r2 < 0               PN or IN              Asymptotically        N or SpP       Asymptotically
                                                                 stable                              stable
              r1 , r2 = λ ± iμ
                  λ>0                   SpP                   Unstable              SpP            Unstable
                  λ<0                   SpP                   Asymptotically        SpP            Asymptotically
                                                                 stable                              stable
              r1 = iμ, r2 = −iμ         C                     Stable                C or SpP       Indeterminate
              Note: N, node; IN, improper node; PN, proper node; SP, saddle point; SpP, spiral point;
              C, center.
   At this stage, the proof of Theorem 9.3.2 is too difficult to give, so we will accept
the results without proof. The statements for asymptotic stability and instability
follow as a consequence of a result discussed in Section 9.6, and a proof is sketched in
Problems 10 to 12 of that section. Essentially, Theorem 9.3.2 says that for small x (or
x − x0 ) the nonlinear terms are also small and do not affect the stability and type of
critical point as determined by the linear terms, except in two sensitive cases. If r1 and
r2 are pure imaginary, then the small nonlinear terms may change the stable center
into a spiral point, which may be either asymptotically stable or unstable. If r1 and r2
are real and equal, then the nonlinear terms may change the node into a spiral point,
but its asymptotic stability or instability remains unchanged. Recall that earlier in
this section we stated that small perturbations in the coefficients of the linear system
(1), and hence in the eigenvalues r1 and r2 , can alter the type and stability of the crit-
ical point only in these two cases. It is reasonable to expect that the small nonlinear
term in Eq. (4) might have a similar substantial effect, at least in these two cases. This
is so, but the main significance of Theorem 9.3.2 is that in all other cases the small
nonlinear term does not alter the type or stability of the critical point. Thus, except
in the two sensitive cases, the type and stability of the critical point of the nonlinear
system (4) can be determined from a study of the much simpler linear system (1).
   Even if the critical point is of the same type as that of the linear system, the
trajectories of the locally linear system may be considerably different in appearance
from those of the corresponding linear system, except very near the critical point.
However, it can be shown that the slopes at which trajectories “enter” or “leave” the
critical point are given correctly by the linear system.
Damped Pendulum. We continue the discussion of the damped pendulum begun in
Examples 2 and 3. Near the origin the nonlinear equations (8) are approximated
by the linear system (17), whose eigenvalues are
                                                  
                                             −γ ±   γ 2 − 4ω2
                                  r 1 , r2 =                  .                              (19)
                                                    2
The nature of the solutions of Eqs. (8) and (17) depends on the sign of γ 2 − 4ω2 as
follows:
1.  If γ 2 − 4ω2 > 0, then the eigenvalues are real, unequal, and negative. The critical point
    (0, 0) is an asymptotically stable node of the linear system (17) and of the locally linear
    system (8).
2. If γ 2 − 4ω2 = 0, then the eigenvalues are real, equal, and negative. The critical point (0, 0)
    is an asymptotically stable (proper or improper) node of the linear system (17). It may be
    either an asymptotically stable node or spiral point of the locally linear system (8).
3. If γ 2 − 4ω2 < 0, then the eigenvalues are complex with negative real part. The critical
    point (0, 0) is an asymptotically stable spiral point of the linear system (17) and of the
    locally linear system (8).
Thus the critical point (0, 0) is a spiral point of the system (8) if the damping is small
and a node if the damping is large enough. In either case, the origin is asymptotically
stable.
   Let us now consider the case γ 2 − 4ω2 < 0, corresponding to small damping, in
more detail. The direction of motion on the spirals near (0, 0) can be obtained directly
from Eqs. (8). Consider the point at which a spiral intersects the positive y-axis (x = 0
and y > 0). It follows from Eqs. (8) that at such a point, dx/dt > 0. Thus the point
(x, y) on the trajectory is moving to the right, so the direction of motion on the spirals
is clockwise.
   The behavior of the pendulum near the critical points (±nπ, 0), with n even, is
the same as its behavior near the origin. We expect this on physical grounds since
all these critical points correspond to the downward equilibrium position of the
pendulum. The conclusion can be confirmed by repeating the analysis carried out
above for the origin. Figure 9.3.3 shows the clockwise spirals at a few of these critical
points.
                                              y
                              –π                        π                    x
             –2π                                                  2π
       FIGURE 9.3.3 Asymptotically stable spiral points for the damped pendulum.
   Now let us consider the critical point (π, 0). Here the nonlinear equations (8) are
approximated by the linear system (18), whose eigenvalues are
                                                 
                                            −γ ± γ 2 + 4ω2
                                 r 1 , r2 =                 .                        (20)
                                                    2
One eigenvalue (r1 ) is positive and the other (r2 ) is negative. Therefore, regardless
of the amount of damping, the critical point x = π, y = 0 is an unstable saddle point
both of the linear system (18) and of the locally linear system (8).
   To examine the behavior of trajectories near the saddle point (π, 0) in more detail,
we write down the general solution of Eqs. (18), namely,
                                                     
                              u              1 r1 t      1 r2 t
                                   = C1         e + C2        e ,                    (21)
                              v             r1           r2
where C1 and C2 are arbitrary constants. Since r1 > 0 and r2 < 0, it follows that the
solution that approaches zero as t → ∞ corresponds to C1 = 0. For this solution
v/u = r2 , so the slope of the entering trajectories is negative; one lies in the second
quadrant (C2 < 0), and the other lies in the fourth quadrant (C2 > 0). For C2 = 0
we obtain the pair of trajectories “exiting” from the saddle point. These trajectories
have slope r1 > 0; one lies in the first quadrant (C1 > 0), and the other lies in the
third quadrant (C1 < 0).
   The situation is the same at other critical points (nπ, 0) with n odd. These all
correspond to the upward equilibrium position of the pendulum, so we expect them
to be unstable. The analysis at (π, 0) can be repeated to show that they are saddle
points oriented in the same way as the one at (π, 0). Diagrams of the trajectories in
the neighborhood of two saddle points are shown in Figure 9.3.4.
                                                      y
                                        –π                           π               x
                     FIGURE 9.3.4      Unstable saddle points for the damped pendulum.
        The equations of motion of a certain pendulum are
EXAMPLE
                                     dx/dt = y,       dy/dt = −9 sin x − 15 y,                         (22)
   4
        where x = θ and y = dθ/dt. Draw a phase portrait for this system, and explain how it shows
        the possible motions of the pendulum.
           By plotting the trajectories starting at various initial points in the phase plane, we obtain
        the phase portrait shown in Figure 9.3.5. As we have seen, the critical points (equilibrium
        solutions) are the points (nπ, 0), where n = 0, ± 1, ± 2, . . . . Even values of n, including zero,
        correspond to the downward position of the pendulum, while odd values of n correspond to
        the upward position. Near each of the asymptotically stable critical points, the trajectories
        are clockwise spirals that represent a decaying oscillation about the downward equilibrium
        position. The wavy horizontal portions of the trajectories that occur for larger values of |y|
        represent whirling motions of the pendulum. Note that a whirling motion cannot continue
        indefinitely, no matter how large |y| is; eventually, the angular velocity is so much reduced by
        the damping term that the pendulum can no longer go over the top and, instead, begins to
        oscillate about its downward position.
                                                       y
                                                      10
                                                        5
                        –8      –6      –4     –2               2         4      6      8       x
                                                      –5
                                                    –10
                   FIGURE 9.3.5      Phase portrait for the damped pendulum of Example 4.
           The basin of attraction for the origin is the shaded region in Figure 9.3.5. It is bounded by
        the trajectories that enter the two adjacent saddle points at (π, 0) and (−π, 0). The bound-
        ing trajectories are separatrices. Each asymptotically stable critical point has its own basin of
        attraction, which is bounded by the separatrices entering the two neighboring saddle points.
         All of the basins of attraction are congruent to the shaded one; the only difference is that
         they are translated horizontally by appropriate distances. Note that it is mathematically pos-
         sible (but physically unrealizable) to choose initial conditions exactly on a separatrix so that
         the resulting motion leads to a balanced pendulum in a vertically upward position of unstable
         equilibrium.
            An important difference between nonlinear autonomous systems and the linear
         systems discussed in Section 9.1 is illustrated by the pendulum equations. Recall that
         the linear system (1) has only the single critical point x = 0 if det A  = 0. Thus, if
         the origin is asymptotically stable, then not only do trajectories that start close to the
         origin approach it, but, in fact, every trajectory approaches the origin. In this case
         the critical point x = 0 is said to be globally asymptotically stable. This property of
         linear systems is not, in general, true for nonlinear systems, even if the nonlinear
         system has only one asymptotically stable critical point. Therefore, for nonlinear
         systems, it is important to determine (or to estimate) the basin of attraction for each
         asymptotically stable critical point.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4, verify that (0, 0) is a critical point, show that the system is
         locally linear, and discuss the type and stability of the critical point (0, 0) by examining the
         corresponding linear system.
           1. dx/dt = x − y2 ,      dy/dt = x − 2y + x2
           2. dx/dt = −x + y + 2xy,         dy/dt = −4x − y + x2 − y2
           3. dx/dt = (1 + x) sin y,      dy/dt = 1 − x − cos y
           4. dx/dt = x + y2 ,      dy/dt = x + y
         In each of Problems 5 through 18:
         (a) Determine all critical points of the given system of equations.
         (b) Find the corresponding linear system near each critical point.
         (c) Find the eigenvalues of each linear system. What conclusions can you then draw about
         the nonlinear system?
         (d) Draw a phase portrait of the nonlinear system to confirm your conclusions, or to extend
         them in those cases where the linear system does not provide definite information about the
         nonlinear system.
           5. dx/dt = (2 + x)(y − x),       dy/dt = (4 − x)(y + x)
           6. dx/dt = x − x2 − xy,       dy/dt = 3y − xy − 2y2
           7. dx/dt = 1 − y,      dy/dt = x2 − y2
           8. dx/dt = x − x − xy,
                            2
                                         dy/dt = 21 y − 14 y2 − 34 xy
           9. dx/dt = (2 + y)(y − 0.5x),       dy/dt = (2 − x)(y + 0.5x)
         10. dx/dt = x + x2 + y2 ,       dy/dt = y − xy
         11. dx/dt = 2x + y + xy3 ,        dy/dt = x − 2y − xy
         12. dx/dt = (1 + x) sin y,       dy/dt = 1 − x − cos y
         13. dx/dt = x − y2 ,       dy/dt = y − x2
         14. dx/dt = 1 − xy,        dy/dt = x − y3
         15. dx/dt = −2x − y − x(x2 + y2 ),        dy/dt = x − y + y(x2 + y2 )
         16. dx/dt = y + x(1 − x − y ),
                                   2    2
                                                dy/dt = −x + y(1 − x2 − y2 )
17. dx/dt = 4 − y2 ,       dy/dt = (1.5 + x)(y − x)
18. dx/dt = (1 − y)(2x − y),          dy/dt = (2 + x)(x − 2y)
19. Consider the autonomous system
                                     dx/dt = y,       dy/dt = x + 2x3 .
    (a) Show that the critical point (0, 0) is a saddle point.
    (b) Sketch the trajectories for the corresponding linear system by integrating the equation
    for dy/dx. Show from the parametric form of the solution that the only trajectory on which
    x → 0, y → 0 as t → ∞ is y = −x.
    (c) Determine the trajectories for the nonlinear system by integrating the equation for
    dy/dx. Sketch the trajectories for the nonlinear system that correspond to y = −x and
    y = x for the linear system.
20. Consider the autonomous system
                                    dx/dt = x,       dy/dt = −2y + x3 .
    (a) Show that the critical point (0, 0) is a saddle point.
    (b) Sketch the trajectories for the corresponding linear system, and show that the
    trajectory for which x → 0, y → 0 as t → ∞ is given by x = 0.
    (c) Determine the trajectories for the nonlinear system for x  = 0 by integrating the equa-
    tion for dy/dx. Show that the trajectory corresponding to x = 0 for the linear system is
    unaltered, but that the one corresponding to y = 0 is y = x3 /5. Sketch several of the
    trajectories for the nonlinear system.
21. The equation of motion of an undamped pendulum is d2 θ/dt 2 + ω2 sin θ = 0, where
    ω2 = g/L. Let x = θ, y = dθ/dt to obtain the system of equations
                                    dx/dt = y,       dy/dt = −ω2 sin x.
    (a) Show that the critical points are (±nπ, 0), n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , and that the system is locally
    linear in the neighborhood of each critical point.
    (b) Show that the critical point (0, 0) is a (stable) center of the corresponding linear
    system. Using Theorem 9.3.2, what can you say about the nonlinear system? The
    situation is similar at the critical points (±2nπ, 0), n = 1, 2, 3, . . . . What is the physical
    interpretation of these critical points?
    (c) Show that the critical point (π, 0) is an (unstable) saddle point of the correspond-
    ing linear system. What conclusion can you draw about the nonlinear system? The
    situation is similar at the critical points [±(2n − 1)π, 0], n = 1, 2, 3, . . . . What is the physical
    interpretation of these critical points?
    (d) Choose a value for ω2 and plot a few trajectories of the nonlinear system in the
    neighborhood of the origin. Can you now draw any further conclusion about the nature
    of the critical point at (0, 0) for the nonlinear system?
    (e) Using the value of ω2 from part (d), draw a phase portrait for the pendulum. Compare
    your plot with Figure 9.3.5 for the damped pendulum.
22. (a) By solving the equation for dy/dx, show that the equation of the trajectories of the
    undamped pendulum of Problem 21 can be written as
                                          2
                                            y + ω2 (1 − cos x) = c,
                                          1 2
                                                                                                       (i)
    where c is a constant of integration.
    (b) Multiply Eq. (i) by mL2 . Then express the result in terms of θ to obtain
                                             2
                                 1       dθ
                                   mL2          + mgL(1 − cos θ) = E,                         (ii)
                                 2       dt
    where E = mL2 c.
    (c) Show that the first term in Eq. (ii) is the kinetic energy of the pendulum and that
    the second term is the potential energy due to gravity. Thus the total energy E of the
    pendulum is constant along any trajectory; its value is determined by the initial conditions.
23. The motion of a certain undamped pendulum is described by the equations
                                   dx/dt = y,      dy/dt = −4 sin x.
    If the pendulum is set in motion with an angular displacement A and no initial velocity,
    then the initial conditions are x(0) = A, y(0) = 0.
    (a) Let A = 0.25 and plot x versus t. From the graph, estimate the amplitude R and
    period T of the resulting motion of the pendulum.
    (b) Repeat part (a) for A = 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0.
    (c) How do the amplitude and period of the pendulum’s motion depend on the initial
    position A? Draw a graph to show each of these relationships. Can you say anything about
    the limiting value of the period as A → 0?
    (d) Let A = 4 and plot x versus t. Explain why this graph differs from those in parts (a)
    and (b). For what value of A does the transition take place?
24. Consider again the pendulum equations (see Problem 23)
                                   dx/dt = y,      dy/dt = −4 sin x.
    If the pendulum is set in motion from its downward equilibrium position with angular
    velocity v, then the initial conditions are x(0) = 0, y(0) = v.
    (a) Plot x versus t for v = 2 and also for v = 5. Explain the differing motions of the
    pendulum that these two graphs represent.
    (b) There is a critical value of v, which we denote by vc , such that one type of motion
    occurs for v < vc and the other for v > vc . Estimate the value of vc .
25. This problem extends Problem 24 to a damped pendulum. The equations of motion are
                                dx/dt = y,      dy/dt = −4 sin x − γy,
    where γ is the damping coefficient, with the initial conditions x(0) = 0, y(0) = v.
    (a) For γ = 1/4, plot x versus t for v = 2 and for v = 5. Explain these plots in terms of
    the motions of the pendulum that they represent. Also explain how they are related to the
    corresponding graphs in Problem 24(a).
    (b) Estimate the critical value vc of the initial velocity where the transition from one type
    of motion to the other occurs.
    (c) Repeat part (b) for other values of γ and determine how vc depends on γ.
26. Theorem 9.3.2 provides no information about the stability of a critical point of a locally
    linear system if that point is a center of the corresponding linear system. That this must
    be the case is illustrated by the systems
                                       dx/dt = y + x(x2 + y2 ),
                                                                                               (i)
                                       dy/dt = −x + y(x2 + y2 )
    and
                                        dx/dt = y − x(x2 + y2 ),
                                                                                                   (ii)
                                        dy/dt = −x − y(x2 + y2 ).
    (a) Show that (0, 0) is a critical point of each system and, furthermore, is a center of the
    corresponding linear system.
    (b) Show that each system is locally linear.
    (c) Let r 2 = x2 + y2 , and note that x dx/dt + y dy/dt = r dr/dt. For system (ii), show that
    dr/dt < 0 and that r → 0 as t → ∞; hence the critical point is asymptotically stable. For
    system (i), show that the solution of the initial value problem for r with r = r0 at t = 0
    becomes unbounded as t → 1/2r02 , and hence the critical point is unstable.
27. In this problem we show how small changes in the coefficients of a system of linear
    equations can affect a critical point that is a center. Consider the system
                                                             
                                                    0      1
                                           x =                  x.
                                                  −1        0
    Show that the eigenvalues are ±i so that (0, 0) is a center. Now consider the system
                                                             
                                                          1
                                           x =                  x,
                                                  −1        
    where || is arbitrarily small. Show that the eigenvalues are  ± i. Thus no matter how
    small ||  = 0 is, the center becomes a spiral point. If  < 0, the spiral point is asymptotically
    stable; if  > 0, the spiral point is unstable.
28. In this problem we show how small changes in the coefficients of a system of linear equa-
    tions can affect the nature of a critical point when the eigenvalues are equal. Consider the
    system                                                   
                                                 −1        1
                                           x =                  x.
                                                     0 −1
    Show that the eigenvalues are r1 = −1, r2 = −1 so that the critical point (0, 0) is an
    asymptotically stable node. Now consider the system
                                                             
                                                 −1        1
                                           x =                  x,
                                                  − −1
                                                                                                   √
    where || is arbitrarily small. Show that if  > 0, then the eigenvalues are −1 ± i ,
    so that the asymptotically stable √    node becomes an asymptotically stable spiral point.
    If  < 0, then the roots are −1 ± ||, and the critical point remains an asymptotically
    stable node.
29. In this problem we derive a formula for the natural period of an undamped nonlinear
    pendulum [c = 0 in Eq. (10) of Section 9.2]. Suppose that the bob is pulled through a
    positive angle α and then released with zero velocity.
    (a) We usually think of θ and dθ/dt as functions of t. However, if we reverse the roles of
    t and θ, we can regard t as a function of θ and, consequently, can also think of dθ/dt as a
    function of θ. Then derive the following sequence of equations:
                                                      
                                    1    2 d     dθ 2
                                      mL                 = −mgL sin θ,
                                    2     dθ     dt
                                                                 2
                                                   1        dθ
                                                     m L             = mgL(cos θ − cos α),
                                                   2         dt
                                                                     L         dθ
                                                       dt = −           √                .
                                                                    2g cos θ − cos α
                  Why was the negative square root chosen in the last equation?
                   (b) If T is the natural period of oscillation, derive the formula
                                                                       0
                                                     T           L               dθ
                                                        =−                 √                .
                                                     4           2g    α     cos θ − cos α
                   (c) By using the identities cos θ = 1 − 2 sin2 (θ/2) and cos α = 1 − 2 sin2 (α/2), followed by
                   the change of variable sin(θ/2) = k sin φ with k = sin(α/2), show that
                                                                     π/2
                                                                L                dφ
                                                     T =4                                 .
                                                                g    0       1 − k2 sin2 φ
                  The integral is called the elliptic integral of the first kind. Note that the period depends
                   on the ratio L/g and also on the initial displacement α through k = sin(α/2).
                   (d) By evaluating the integral in the expression for T, obtain values for T that you can
                   compare with the graphical estimates you obtained in Problem 23.
              30. A generalization of the damped pendulum equation discussed in the text, or a damped
                   spring–mass system, is the Liénard4 equation
                                                         d2 x          dx
                                                              + c(x)        + g(x) = 0.
                                                         dt 2           dt
                   If c(x) is a constant and g(x) = kx, then this equation has the form of the linear pen-
                   dulum equation [replace sin θ with θ in Eq. (12) of Section 9.2]; otherwise, the damping
                   force c(x) dx/dt and the restoring force g(x) are nonlinear. Assume that c is continuously
                   differentiable, g is twice continuously differentiable, and g(0) = 0.
                   (a) Write the Liénard equation as a system of two first order equations by introducing
                   the variable y = dx/dt.
                   (b) Show that (0, 0) is a critical point and that the system is locally linear in the
                   neighborhood of (0, 0).
                   (c) Show that if c(0) > 0 and g (0) > 0, then the critical point is asymptotically stable, and
                   that if c(0) < 0 or g  (0) < 0, then the critical point is unstable.
                   Hint: Use Taylor series to approximate c and g in the neighborhood of x = 0.
9.4 Competing Species
              In this section and the next, we explore the application of phase plane analysis to
              some problems in population dynamics. These problems involve two interacting
              populations and are extensions of those discussed in Section 2.5, which dealt with
              4Alfred-Marie Liénard (1869–1958), a French physicist and engineer, was professor at l’École des Mines
              in Paris. He worked primarily in electricity, mechanics, and applied mathematics. The results of his
              investigation of this differential equation were published in 1928.
        a single population. Although the equations discussed here are extremely simple
        compared to the very complex relationships that exist in nature, it is still possible to
        acquire some insight into ecological principles from a study of these model problems.
        The same, or similar, models have also been used to study other types of competitive
        situations—for instance, businesses competing in the same market.
           Suppose that in some closed environment there are two similar species competing
        for a limited food supply—for example, two species of fish in a pond that do not prey
        on each other but do compete for the available food. Let x and y be the populations of
        the two species at time t. As discussed in Section 2.5, we assume that the population
        of each of the species, in the absence of the other, is governed by a logistic equation.
        Thus
                                                 dx/dt = x(1 − σ1 x),                                    (1a)
                                                 dy/dt = y(2 − σ2 y),                                    (1b)
        respectively, where 1 and 2 are the growth rates of the two populations, and 1 /σ1
        and 2 /σ2 are their saturation levels. However, when both species are present, each
        will tend to diminish the available food supply for the other. In effect, they reduce
        each other’s growth rates and saturation populations. The simplest expression for
        reducing the growth rate of species x due to the presence of species y is to replace the
        growth rate factor 1 − σ1 x in Eq. (1a) by 1 − σ1 x − α1 y, where α1 is a measure of
        the degree to which species y interferes with species x. Similarly,in Eq. (1b) we replace
        2 − σ2 y by 2 − σ2 y − α2 x. Thus we have the system of equations
                                              dx/dt = x(1 − σ1 x − α1 y),
                                                                                                            (2)
                                              dy/dt = y(2 − σ2 y − α2 x).
        The values of the positive constants 1 , σ1 , α1 , 2 , σ2 , and α2 depend on the particular
        species under consideration and in general must be determined from observations.
        We are interested in solutions of Eqs. (2) for which x and y are nonnegative. In the
        following two examples we discuss two typical problems in some detail. At the end
        of the section we return to the general equations (2).
        Discuss the qualitative behavior of solutions of the system
EXAMPLE
                                               dx/dt = x(1 − x − y),
   1                                                                                                        (3)
                                               dy/dt = y(0.75 − y − 0.5x).
           We find the critical points by solving the system of algebraic equations
                                     x(1 − x − y) = 0,        y(0.75 − y − 0.5x) = 0.                       (4)
        The first equation can be satisfied by choosing x = 0; then the second equation requires that
        y = 0 or y = 0.75. Similarly, the second equation can be satisfied by choosing y = 0, and then
        the first equation requires that x = 0 or x = 1. Thus we have found three critical points, namely,
        (0, 0), (0, 0.75), and (1, 0). If neither x nor y is zero, then Eqs. (4) are also satisfied by solutions
        of the system
                                         1 − x − y = 0,       0.75 − y − 0.5x = 0,                          (5)
        which leads to a fourth critical point (0.5, 0.5). These four critical points correspond to equi-
        librium solutions of the system (3). The first three of these points involve the absence of one
        or both species; only the last corresponds to the presence of both species. Other solutions
        are represented as curves or trajectories in the xy-plane that describe the evolution of the
populations in time. To begin to discover their qualitative behavior, we can proceed in the
following way.
   First, observe that the coordinate axes are themselves trajectories. This follows directly
from Eqs. (3) since dx/dt = 0 on the y-axis (where x = 0) and, similarly, dy/dt = 0 on the
x-axis (where y = 0). Thus no other trajectories can cross the coordinate axes. For a popu-
lation problem only nonnegative values of x and y are significant, and we conclude that any
trajectory that starts in the first quadrant remains there for all time.
   A direction field for the system (3) in the positive quadrant is shown in Figure 9.4.1; the
black dots in this figure are the critical points or equilibrium solutions. Based on the direction
field, it appears that the point (0.5, 0.5) attracts other solutions and is therefore asymptotically
stable, while the other three critical points are unstable. To confirm these conclusions, we can
look at the linear approximations near each critical point.
              y
              1
           0.75
            0.5
           0.25
              0            0.25         0.5         0.75          1          1.25        x
             FIGURE 9.4.1       Critical points and direction field for the system (3).
   The system (3) is locally linear in the neighborhood of each critical point. There are two
ways to obtain the linear system near a critical point (X , Y). First, we can use the substitution
x = X + u, y = Y + v in Eqs. (3), retaining only the terms that are linear in u and v. Alter-
natively, we can evaluate the Jacobian matrix J at each critical point to obtain the coefficient
matrix in the approximating linear system; see Eq. (13) in Section 9.3. When several critical
points are to be investigated, it is usually better to use the Jacobian matrix. For the system (3),
we have
                    F(x, y) = x(1 − x − y),        G(x, y) = y(0.75 − y − 0.5x),                (6)
so
                                                                     
                                     1 − 2x − y           −x
                             J=                                         .                       (7)
                                       −0.5y       0.75 − 2y − 0.5x
We will now examine each critical point in turn.
x = 0, y = 0. This critical point corresponds to the state in which neither species is present.
To determine what happens near the origin we can set x = y = 0 in Eq. (7), which leads to the
corresponding linear system
                                                             
                                     d x           1      0       x
                                              =                      .                            (8)
                                    dt y           0      0.75    y
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the system (8) are
                                                                               
                                    (1)      1                            (2)    0
                      r1 = 1,     ξ =           ;      r2 = 0.75,       ξ     =       ,           (9)
                                             0                                    1
so the general solution of the system is
                                                          
                                     x           1 t          0 0.75t
                                         = c1        e + c2      e .                             (10)
                                     y           0            1
Thus the origin is an unstable node of both the linear system (8) and the nonlinear system
(3). In the neighborhood of the origin, all trajectories are tangent to the y-axis except for one
trajectory that lies along the x-axis. If either or both of the species are present in small numbers,
the population(s) will grow.
x = 1, y = 0. This corresponds to a state in which species x is present but species y is not.
By evaluating J from Eq. (7) at (1, 0), we find that the corresponding linear system is
                                                              
                                  d u             −1 −1            u
                                             =                         .                         (11)
                                  dt v              0      0.25    v
Its eigenvalues and eigenvectors are
                                                                                   
                                    (1)      1                            (2)       4
                    r1 = −1,      ξ     =       ;      r2 = 0.25,       ξ     =         ,        (12)
                                             0                                    −5
and its general solution is
                                                         
                                  u            1 −t             4 0.25t
                                        = c1       e + c2          e .                           (13)
                                  v            0              −5
Since the eigenvalues have opposite signs, the point (1, 0) is a saddle point, and so it is an unsta-
ble equilibrium point of the linear system (11) and of the nonlinear system (3). The behavior
of the trajectories near (1, 0) can be seen from Eq. (13). If c2 = 0, then there is one pair of
trajectories that approaches the critical point along the x-axis. In other words, if the y pop-
ulation is initially zero, then it remains zero forever. All other trajectories depart from the
neighborhood of (1, 0); if y is initially small and positive, then the y population grows with
time. As t → −∞, one trajectory approaches the saddle point tangent to the eigenvector ξ (2)
whose slope is −1.25.
x = 0, y = 0.75. This critical point is a state where species y is present but x is not. The
analysis is similar to that for the point (1, 0). The corresponding linear system is
                                                               
                                d u               0.25       0       u
                                          =                                .                     (14)
                                dt v           −0.375 −0.75          v
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors are
                                                                                          
                                      (1)      8                                    (2)      0
                    r1 = 0.25,      ξ     =         ;       r2 = −0.75,           ξ     =      ,       (15)
                                              −3                                             1
so the general solution of Eq. (14) is
                                                              
                                   u             8 0.25t          0 −0.75t
                                        = c1          e     + c2        e       .                      (16)
                                   v           −3                 1
Thus the point (0, 0.75) is also a saddle point. All trajectories leave the neighborhood of this
point except one pair that approaches along the y-axis. The trajectory that approaches the
saddle point as t → −∞ is tangent to the line with slope −0.375 determined by the eigenvector
ξ (1) . If the x population is initially zero, it will remain zero, but a small positive x population
will grow.
x = 0.5, y = 0.5. This critical point corresponds to a mixed equilibrium state, or coexis-
tence, in the competition between the two species. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the
corresponding linear system
                                                                  
                                     d    u       −0.5         −0.5       u
                                             =                                                         (17)
                                    dt    v       −0.25        −0.5       v
are
                                                                             √ 
                                          √                                       2
                           r1 = (−2 + 2)/4 ∼    = −0.146,          ξ (1)
                                                                         =              ;
                                                                               −1
                                                                             √                       (18)
                                          √                                       2
                           r2 = (−2 − 2)/4 ∼    = −0.854,            (2)
                                                                   ξ =                  .
                                                                                 1
Therefore, the general solution of Eq. (17) is
                                        √                    √ 
                               u             2      −0.146t          2
                                   = c1           e         + c2            e−0.854t .                 (19)
                               v            −1                      1
Since both eigenvalues are negative, the critical point (0.5, 0.5) is an asymptotically sta-
ble node of the linear system (17) and of the nonlinear system (3). All nearby trajectories
approach the critical point √    as t → ∞. One pair of trajectories approaches the critical point
                                                                                         (2)
along the line with slope 2/2 determined from the eigenvector                     √ ξ . All other trajecto-
ries approach the critical point tangent to the line with slope − 2/2 determined from the
eigenvector ξ (1) .
    A phase portrait for the system (3) is shown in Figure 9.4.2. By looking closely at the
trajectories near each critical point, you can see that they behave in the manner predicted by
the linear system near that point. In addition, note that the quadratic terms on the right side
of Eqs. (3) are all negative. Since for x and y large and positive these terms are the dominant
ones, it follows that far from the origin in the first quadrant both x and y are negative; that
is, the trajectories are directed inward. Thus all trajectories that start at a point (x0 , y0 ) with
x0 > 0 and y0 > 0 eventually approach the point (0.5, 0.5). In other words, the entire open first
quadrant is the basin of attraction for (0.5, 0.5).
                     y
                     1
                  0.75
                   0.5
                  0.25
                                 0.25          0.5        0.75           1          1.25          x
                               FIGURE 9.4.2 A phase portrait of the system (3).
        Discuss the qualitative behavior of the solutions of the system
EXAMPLE
                                         dx/dt = x(1 − x − y),
   2                                                                                                     (20)
                                         dy/dt = y(0.5 − 0.25y − 0.75x),
        when x and y are nonnegative. Observe that this system is also a special case of the system (2)
        for two competing species.
           Once again, there are four critical points, namely, (0, 0), (1, 0), (0, 2), and (0.5, 0.5), corre-
        sponding to equilibrium solutions of the system (20). Figure 9.4.3 shows a direction field for
        the system (20),together with the four critical points. From the direction field it appears that the
        mixed equilibrium solution (0.5, 0.5) is a saddle point, and therefore unstable, while the points
        (1, 0) and (0, 2) are asymptotically stable. Thus, for competition described by Eqs. (20), one
        species will eventually overwhelm the other and drive it to extinction. The surviving species is
        determined by the initial state of the system. To confirm these conclusions, we can look at the
        linear approximations near each critical point. For later use, we record the Jacobian matrix J
        for the system (20):
                                                                                        
                               Fx (x, y) Fy (x, y)      1 − 2x − y               −x
                        J=                           =                                       .           (21)
                               Gx (x, y) Gy (x, y)         −0.75y       0.5 − 0.5y − 0.75x
        x = 0, y = 0. Using the Jacobian matrix J from Eq. (21) evaluated at (0, 0), we obtain the
        linear system
                                                                  
                                            d    x      1       0      x
                                                    =                     ,                              (22)
                                           dt    y      0       0.5    y
        which is valid near the origin. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the system (22) are
                                                                                 
                                           (1)     1                         (2)     0
                              r1 = 1,     ξ =         ;      r2 = 0.5,      ξ =         ,                (23)
                                                   0                                 1
                   y
                   2
                 1.5
                   1
                 0.5
                   0         0.25       0.5      0.75       1       1.25          x
            FIGURE 9.4.3       Critical points and direction field for the system (20).
so the general solution is
                                                      
                                     x         1 t        0 0.5t
                                        = c1      e + c2      e .                          (24)
                                     y         0          1
Therefore, the origin is an unstable node of the linear system (22) and also of the nonlinear
system (20). All trajectories leave the neighborhood of the origin tangent to the y-axis except
for one trajectory that lies along the x-axis.
x = 1, y = 0. The corresponding linear system is
                                                         
                                  d    u       −1     −1       u
                                           =                      .                        (25)
                                 dt    v         0    −0.25     v
Its eigenvalues and eigenvectors are
                                                                              
                                  (1)     1                           (2)      4
                 r1 = −1,       ξ =          ;     r2 = −0.25,      ξ     =        ,       (26)
                                          0                                   −3
and its general solution is
                                                     
                                u           1 −t           4 −0.25t
                                      = c1      e + c2         e     .                     (27)
                                 v          0            −3
The point (1, 0) is an asymptotically stable node of the linear system (25) and of the nonlinear
system (20). If the initial values of x and y are sufficiently close to (1, 0), then the interaction
process will lead ultimately to that state—that is, to the survival of species x and the extinction
of species y. There is one pair of trajectories that approaches the critical point along the x-axis.
All other trajectories approach (1, 0) tangent to the line with slope −3/4 that is determined
by the eigenvector ξ (2) .
x = 0, y = 2. The analysis in this case is similar to that for the point (1, 0). The appropriate
linear system is                                                 
                                   d      u        −1           0       u
                                               =                            .                           (28)
                                   dt     v        −1.5       −0.5      v
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of this system are
                                                                                      
                                               1                                          0
                    r1 = −1,        ξ (1) =       ;        r2 = −0.5,          ξ (2) =        ,         (29)
                                               3                                          1
and its general solution is
                                                              
                                    u            1 −t             0 −0.5t
                                          = c1        e + c2          e      .                          (30)
                                    v            3                1
Thus the critical point (0, 2) is an asymptotically stable node of both the linear system (28) and
the nonlinear system (20). All nearby trajectories approach the critical point tangent to the
y-axis except for one trajectory that approaches along the line with slope 3.
x = 0.5, y = 0.5. The corresponding linear system is
                                                                    
                                d     u         −0.5          −0.5         u
                                            =                                    .                      (31)
                                dt    v         −0.375        −0.125       v
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors are
                         √                                                                     
                  −5 + 57 ∼                         (1)
                                                                     1
                                                                                    ∼         1
            r1 =               = 0.1594,          ξ     =            √              =               ,
                       16                                    (−3 −      57)/8           −1.3187
                         √                                                                          (32)
                  −5 − 57 ∼                            (2)
                                                                       1
                                                                                      ∼        1
            r2 =               = −0.7844,            ξ     =           √              =             ,
                       16                                       (−3 +     57)/8             0.5687
so the general solution is
                                                                       
                          u                  1                         1
                             = c1                  e 0.1594t
                                                             + c2               e−0.7844t .             (33)
                          v           −1.3187                       0.5687
Since the eigenvalues are of opposite signs, the critical point (0.5, 0.5) is a saddle point and
therefore is unstable, as we had surmised earlier. All trajectories depart from the neighbor-
hood of the critical point except for one pair that approaches the saddle point as t → ∞.
As
 √ they approach the critical point, the entering trajectories            are tangent to the line with slope
( 57 − 3)/8 ∼ = 0.5687 determined from the eigenvector ξ (2) . There is also a pair of trajectories
that approach the saddle point as t → −∞. These trajectories are tangent to the line with slope
−1.3187 corresponding to ξ (1) .
   A phase portrait for the system (20) is shown in Figure 9.4.4. Near each of the critical
points, the trajectories of the nonlinear system behave as predicted by the corresponding
linear approximation. Of particular interest is the pair of trajectories that enter the saddle
point. These trajectories form a separatrix that divides the first quadrant into two basins of
attraction. Trajectories starting above the separatrix ultimately approach the node at (0, 2),
while trajectories starting below the separatrix approach the node at (1, 0). If the initial state
lies precisely on the separatrix, then the solution (x, y) will approach the saddle point as t → ∞.
However, the slightest perturbation of the point (x, y) as it follows this trajectory will dislodge
the point from the separatrix and cause it to approach one of the nodes instead. Thus, in
practice, one species will survive the competition and the other will not.
                     y
                     2
                   1.5
                     1
                                                        Separatrix
                   0.5
                             0.25       0.5      0.75         1      1.25         x
    FIGURE 9.4.4 A phase portrait of the system (20). The black curve is the separatrix.
   Examples 1 and 2 show that in some cases the competition between two species
leads to an equilibrium state of coexistence, while in other cases the competition
results in the eventual extinction of one of the species. To understand more clearly
how and why this happens, and to learn how to predict which situation will occur, it is
useful to look again at the general system (2). There are four cases to be considered,
depending on the relative orientation of the lines
                       1 − σ1 x − α1 y = 0     and     2 − σ2 y − α2 x = 0,                   (34)
as shown in Figure 9.4.5. These lines are called the x- and y-nullclines, respectively,
because x is zero on the first and y is zero on the second. In each part of Figure 9.4.5,
the x-nullcline is the solid line and the y-nullcline is the dashed line.
   Let (X , Y) denote any critical point in any one of the four cases. As in Examples
1 and 2, the system (2) is locally linear in the neighborhood of this point because the
right side of each differential equation is a quadratic polynomial. To study the system
                   y                                          y
                                                          1/α 1
              2 /σ 2
              1/α 1                                       2 /σ 2
                                1/σ 1        2 /α 2                       2 /α 2   1/σ 1
                                                        x                                       x
                                   (a)                                       (b)
                   y                                          y
              2 /σ 2                                      1/α 1
              1/α 1
                                                          2 /σ 2
                                      2 /α 2     1/σ 1                     1/σ 1        2 /α 2
                                                        x                                       x
                                   (c)                                       (d)
 FIGURE 9.4.5 The various cases for the competing-species system (2). The x-nullcline is
                        the solid line, and the y-nullcline is the dashed line.
(2) in the neighborhood of this critical point, we can look at the corresponding linear
system obtained from Eq. (13) of Section 9.3:
                                                                                   
                 d    u         1 − 2σ1 X − α1 Y                  −α1 X                u
                            =                                                                 .   (35)
                dt     v                 −α2 Y               2 − 2σ2 Y − α2 X          v
  We now use Eq. (35) to determine the conditions under which the model described
by Eqs. (2) permits the coexistence of the two species x and y. Of the four possible
cases shown in Figure 9.4.5, coexistence is possible only in cases (c) and (d). In these
cases, the nonzero values of X and Y are obtained by solving the algebraic equations
(34); the result is
                                  1 σ2 − 2 α1                  2 σ1 − 1 α2
                           X=                          ,  Y=                     .                (36)
                                  σ1 σ2 − α1 α2                  σ1 σ2 − α1 α2
Further, since 1 − σ1 X − α1 Y = 0 and 2 − σ2 Y − α2 X = 0, Eq. (35) immediately
reduces to
                                                                    
                                d u                 −σ1 X −α1 X         u
                                            =                              .                      (37)
                               dt v                 −α2 Y −σ2 Y         v
The eigenvalues of the system (37) are found from the equation
                         r 2 + (σ1 X + σ2 Y)r + (σ1 σ2 − α1 α2 )XY = 0.                           (38)
         Thus
                                                    
                               −(σ1 X + σ2 Y) ±       (σ1 X + σ2 Y)2 − 4(σ1 σ2 − α1 α2 )XY
                       r1,2 =                                                                 .       (39)
                                                                2
             If σ1 σ2 − α1 α2 < 0, then the radicand of Eq. (39) is positive and greater than
         (σ1 X + σ2 Y)2 . Thus the eigenvalues are real and opposite in sign. Consequently,
         the critical point (X , Y) is an (unstable) saddle point, and coexistence is not pos-
         sible. This is the case in Example 2, where σ1 = 1, α1 = 1, σ2 = 0.25, α2 = 0.75, and
         σ1 σ2 − α1 α2 = −0.5.
             On the other hand, if σ1 σ2 − α1 α2 > 0, then the radicand of Eq. (39) is less than
         (σ1 X + σ2 Y)2 . Thus the eigenvalues are real, negative, and unequal, or complex with
         negative real part. A straightforward analysis of the radicand of Eq. (39) shows that
         the eigenvalues cannot be complex (see Problem 7). Thus the critical point is an
         asymptotically stable node, and sustained coexistence is possible. This is illustrated
         by Example 1, where σ1 = 1, α1 = 1, σ2 = 1, α2 = 0.5, and σ1 σ2 − α1 α2 = 0.5.
             Let us relate this result to Figures 9.4.5c and 9.4.5d. In Figure 9.4.5c we have
                      1      2                                  2    1
                           >       or    1 α2 > 2 σ1     and       >        or  2 α1 > 1 σ2 .     (40)
                      σ1      α2                                  σ2    α1
         These inequalities, coupled with the condition that X and Y given by Eqs. (36) be
         positive, yield the inequality σ1 σ2 < α1 α2 . Hence in this case the critical point is a
         saddle point. On the other hand, in Figure 9.4.5d we have
                      1      2                                  2    1
                           <       or    1 α2 < 2 σ1     and       <        or  2 α1 < 1 σ2 .     (41)
                      σ1      α2                                  σ2    α1
         Now the condition that X and Y be positive yields σ1 σ2 > α1 α2 . Hence the critical
         point is asymptotically stable. For this case we can also show that the other
         critical points (0, 0), (1 /σ1 , 0), and (0, 2 /σ2 ) are unstable. Thus for any positive initial
         values of x and y, the two populations approach the equilibrium state of coexistence
         given by Eqs. (36).
             Equations (2) provide the biological interpretation of the result that whether coex-
         istence occurs depends on whether σ1 σ2 − α1 α2 is positive or negative. The σ’s are
         a measure of the inhibitory effect that the growth of each population has on itself,
         whereas the α’s are a measure of the inhibiting effect that the growth of each popu-
         lation has on the other species. Thus, when σ1 σ2 > α1 α2 , interaction (competition) is
         “weak” and the species can coexist; when σ1 σ2 < α1 α2 , interaction (competition)
         is “strong” and the species cannot coexist—one must die out.
PROBLEMS Each of Problems 1 through 6 can be interpreted as describing the interaction of two species
         with populations x and y. In each of these problems, carry out the following steps.
         (a) Draw a direction field and describe how solutions seem to behave.
         (b) Find the critical points.
         (c) For each critical point find the corresponding linear system. Find the eigenvalues and
         eigenvectors of the linear system; classify each critical point as to type, and determine whether
         it is asymptotically stable, stable, or unstable.
         (d) Sketch the trajectories in the neighborhood of each critical point.
(e) Compute and plot enough trajectories of the given system to show clearly the behavior of
the solutions.
 (f) Determine the limiting behavior of x and y as t → ∞, and interpret the results in terms
of the populations of the two species.
  1. dx/dt = x(1.5 − x − 0.5y)                          2. dx/dt = x(1.5 − x − 0.5y)
     dy/dt = y(2 − y − 0.75x)                              dy/dt = y(2 − 0.5y − 1.5x)
  3. dx/dt = x(1.5 − 0.5x − y)                          4. dx/dt = x(1.5 − 0.5x − y)
     dy/dt = y(2 − y − 1.125x)                             dy/dt = y(0.75 − y − 0.125x)
  5. dx/dt = x(1 − x − y)                               6. dx/dt = x(1 − x + 0.5y)
     dy/dt = y(1.5 − y − x)                                dy/dt = y(2.5 − 1.5y + 0.25x)
  7. Consider the eigenvalues given by Eq. (39) in the text. Show that
                    (σ1 X + σ2 Y)2 − 4(σ1 σ2 − α1 α2 )XY = (σ1 X − σ2 Y)2 + 4α1 α2 XY.
     Hence conclude that the eigenvalues can never be complex.
  8. Two species of fish that compete with each other for food, but do not prey on each other,
     are bluegill and redear. Suppose that a pond is stocked with bluegill and redear, and let
     x and y be the populations of bluegill and redear, respectively, at time t. Suppose further
     that the competition is modeled by the equations
                                         dx/dt = x(1 − σ1 x − α1 y),
                                         dy/dt = y(2 − σ2 y − α2 x).
     (a) If 2 /α2 > 1 /σ1 and 2 /σ2 > 1 /α1 , show that the only equilibrium populations in the
     pond are no fish, no redear, or no bluegill. What will happen for large t?
     (b) If 1 /σ1 > 2 /α2 and 1 /α1 > 2 /σ2 , show that the only equilibrium populations in the
     pond are no fish, no redear, or no bluegill. What will happen for large t?
  9. Consider the competition between bluegill and redear mentioned in Problem 8. Suppose
     that 2 /α2 > 1 /σ1 and 1 /α1 > 2 /σ2 , so, as shown in the text, there is a stable equilibrium
     point at which both species can coexist. It is convenient to rewrite the equations of Problem
     8 in terms of the carrying capacity of the pond for bluegill (B = 1 /σ1 ) in the absence of
     redear and its carrying capacity for redear (R = 2 /σ2 ) in the absence of bluegill.
     (a) Show that the equations of Problem 8 take the form
                                                                    
                      dx               1     γ1             dy              1      γ2
                          = 1 x 1 − x − y ,                   = 2 y 1 − y − x ,
                       dt             B      B              dt              R      R
     where γ1 = α1 /σ1 and γ2 = α2 /σ2 . Determine the coexistence equilibrium point (X , Y) in
     terms of B, R, γ1 , and γ2 .
     (b) Now suppose that an angler fishes only for bluegill with the effect that B is reduced.
     What effect does this have on the equilibrium populations? Is it possible, by fishing, to
     reduce the population of bluegill to such a level that they will die out?
10. Consider the system (2) in the text, and assume that σ1 σ2 − α1 α2 = 0.
     (a) Find all the critical points of the system. Observe that the result depends on whether
     σ1 2 − α2 1 is zero.
     (b) If σ1 2 − α2 1 > 0, classify each critical point and determine whether it is asymptoti-
     cally stable, stable, or unstable. Note that Problem 5 is of this type. Then do the same if
     σ1 2 − α2 1 < 0.
     (c) Analyze the nature of the trajectories when σ1 2 − α2 1 = 0.
11. Consider the system (3) in Example 1 of the text. Recall that this system has an asymptot-
      ically stable critical point at (0.5, 0.5), corresponding to the stable coexistence of the two
      population species. Now suppose that immigration or emigration occurs at the constant
      rates of δa and δb for the species x and y, respectively. In this case Eqs. (3) are replaced by
                                      dx/dt = x(1 − x − y) + δa,
                                                                                                     (i)
                                       dy/dt = y(0.75 − y − 0.5x) + δb.
      The question is what effect this has on the location of the stable equilibrium point.
      (a) To find the new critical point, we must solve the equations
                                               x(1 − x − y) + δa = 0,
                                                                                                    (ii)
                                         y(0.75 − y − 0.5x) + δb = 0.
      One way to proceed is to assume that x and y are given by power series in the parameter
      δ; thus
                                x = x 0 + x1 δ + · · · ,    y = y0 + y 1 δ + · · · .               (iii)
      Substitute Eqs. (iii) into Eqs. (ii) and collect terms according to powers of δ.
      (b) From the constant terms (the terms not involving δ), show that x0 = 0.5 and y0 = 0.5,
      thus confirming that in the absence of immigration or emigration, the critical point is
      (0.5, 0.5).
      (c) From the terms that are linear in δ, show that
                                      x1 = 4a − 4b,       y1 = −2a + 4b.                           (iv)
      (d) Suppose that a > 0 and b > 0 so that immigration occurs for both species. Show that
      the resulting equilibrium solution may represent an increase in both populations, or an
      increase in one but a decrease in the other. Explain intuitively why this is a reasonable
      result.
12. The system
                                x = −y,       y = −γy − x(x − 0.15)(x − 2)
      results from an approximation to the Hodgkin–Huxley5 equations, which model the
      transmission of neural impulses along an axon.
      (a) Find the critical points, and classify them by investigating the approximate linear
      system near each one.
      (b) Draw phase portraits for γ = 0.8 and for γ = 1.5.
      (c) Consider the trajectory that leaves the critical point (2, 0). Find the value of γ for
      which this trajectory ultimately approaches the origin as t → ∞. Draw a phase portrait
      for this value of γ.
Bifurcation Points.       Consider the system
                                   x = F(x, y, α),      y = G(x, y, α),                            (i)
where α is a parameter. The equations
                                    F(x, y, α) = 0,      G(x, y, α) = 0                             (ii)
5 Sir Alan L. Hodgkin (1914–1998) and Sir Andrew F. Huxley (1917– ), British physiologists and bio-
physicists, studied the excitation and transmission of neural impulses at Cambridge University and the
Marine Biological Association Laboratory in Plymouth. This work was both theoretical (resulting in a
system of nonlinear differential equations) and experimental (involving measurements on the giant axon
of the Atlantic squid). They were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1963.
              determine the x- and y-nullclines, respectively; any point where an x-nullcline and a
              y-nullcline intersect is a critical point. As α varies and the configuration of the nullclines
              changes, it may well happen that, at a certain value of α, two critical points coalesce into one.
              For further variation in α, the critical point may once again separate into two critical points,
              or it may disappear altogether. Or the process may occur in reverse: For a certain value of α,
              two formerly nonintersecting nullclines may come together, creating a critical point, which,
              for further changes in α, may split into two. A value of α at which such phenomena occur is
              a bifurcation point. It is also common for a critical point to experience a change in its type
              and stability properties at a bifurcation point. Thus both the number and the kind of critical
              points may change abruptly as α passes through a bifurcation point. Since a phase portrait of a
              system is very dependent on the location and nature of the critical points, an understanding of
              bifurcations is essential to an understanding of the global behavior of the system’s solutions.
              In each of Problems 13 through 16:
              (a) Sketch the nullclines and describe how the critical points move as α increases.
              (b) Find the critical points.
              (c) Let α = 2. Classify each critical point by investigating the corresponding approximate
              linear system. Draw a phase portrait in a rectangle containing the critical points.
              (d) Find the bifurcation point α0 at which the critical points coincide. Locate this critical point,
              and find the eigenvalues of the approximate linear system. Draw a phase portrait.
              (e) For α > α0 there are no critical points. Choose such a value of α and draw a phase portrait.
              13. x = −4x + y + x2 ,       y = 23 α − y
              14. x = 23 α − y,     y = −4x + y + x2
              15. x = −4x + y + x2 ,       y = −α − x + y
              16. x = −α − x + y,        y = −4x + y + x2
              Problems 17 through 19 deal with competitive systems much like those in Examples 1 and 2,
              except that some coefficients depend on a parameter α. In each of these problems, assume that
              x, y, and α are always nonnegative. In each of Problems 17 through 19:
              (a) Sketch the nullclines in the first quadrant, as in Figure 9.4.5. For different ranges of α your
              sketch may resemble different parts of Figure 9.4.5.
              (b) Find the critical points.
              (c) Determine the bifurcation points.
              (d) Find the Jacobian matrix J, and evaluate it for each of the critical points.
              (e) Determine the type and stability property of each critical point. Pay particular attention
              to what happens as α passes through a bifurcation point.
              (f) Draw phase portraits for the system for selected values of α to confirm your conclusions.
              17. dx/dt = x(1 − x − y),        dy/dt = y(α − y − 0.5x)
              18. dx/dt = x(1 − x − y),        dy/dt = y(0.75 − αy − 0.5x)
              19. dx/dt = x(1 − x − y),        dy/dt = y[α − y − (2α − 1)x]
9.5 Predator–Prey Equations
              In the preceding section we discussed a model of two species that interact by
              competing for a common food supply or other natural resource. In this section we
investigate the situation in which one species (the predator) preys on the other species
(the prey), while the prey lives on a different source of food. For example, consider
foxes and rabbits in a closed forest. The foxes prey on the rabbits, the rabbits live
on the vegetation in the forest. Other examples are bass in a lake as predators and
redear as prey, and ladybugs as predators and aphids as prey. We emphasize again
that a model involving only two species cannot fully describe the complex relation-
ships among species that actually occur in nature. Nevertheless, the study of simple
models is the first step toward an understanding of more complicated phenomena.
   We will denote by x and y the populations of the prey and predator, respectively,
at time t. In constructing a model of the interaction of the two species, we make the
following assumptions:
1.   In the absence of the predator, the prey grows at a rate proportional to the current
     population; thus dx/dt = ax, a > 0, when y = 0.
2. In the absence of the prey, the predator dies out; thus dy/dt = −cy, c > 0, when x = 0.
3. The number of encounters between predator and prey is proportional to the product
     of their populations. Each such encounter tends to promote the growth of the predator
     and to inhibit the growth of the prey. Thus the growth rate of the predator is increased by
     a term of the form γxy, while the growth rate of the prey is decreased by a term −αxy,
     where γ and α are positive constants.
   As a consequence of these assumptions, we are led to the equations
                                dx/dt = ax − αxy = x(a − αy),
                                                                                                       (1)
                                dy/dt = −cy + γxy = y(−c + γx).
The constants a, c, α, and γ are all positive; a and c are the growth rate of the prey
and the death rate of the predator, respectively, and α and γ are measures of the effect
of the interaction between the two species. Equations (1) are known as the Lotka–
Volterra equations.They were developed in papers by Lotka6 in 1925 and byVolterra7
in 1926. Although these are rather simple equations, they do characterize a wide class
of problems. Ways of making them more realistic are discussed at the end of this
section and in the problems. Our goal here is to determine the qualitative behavior
of the solutions (trajectories) of the system (1) for arbitrary positive initial values of x
and y. We first do this for a specific example and then return to the general equations
(1) at the end of the section.
6Alfred J. Lotka (1880–1949), an American biophysicist, was born in what is now Ukraine and was educated
mainly in Europe. He is remembered chiefly for his formulation of the Lotka–Volterra equations. He was
also the author, in 1924, of the first book on mathematical biology; it is now available as Elements of
Mathematical Biology (New York: Dover, 1956).
7Vito Volterra (1860–1940), a distinguished Italian mathematician, held professorships at Pisa, Turin,
and Rome. He is particularly famous for his work in integral equations and functional analysis. Indeed,
one of the major classes of integral equations is named for him; see Problem 21 of Section 6.6. His theory
of interacting species was motivated by data collected by a friend, D’Ancona, concerning fish catches
in the Adriatic Sea. A translation of his 1926 paper can be found in an appendix to R. N. Chapman,
Animal Ecology with Special Reference to Insects (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1931).
        Discuss the solutions of the system
EXAMPLE
                              dx/dt = x(1 − 0.5y) = x − 0.5xy = F(x, y),
   1                                                                                                   (2)
                              dy/dt = y(−0.75 + 0.25x) = −0.75y + 0.25xy = G(x, y)
        for x and y positive.
           The critical points of this system are the solutions of the algebraic equations
                                     x(1 − 0.5y) = 0,      y(−0.75 + 0.25x) = 0,                       (3)
        namely, the points (0, 0) and (3, 2). Figure 9.5.1 shows the critical points and a direction field
        for the system (2). From this figure it appears that trajectories in the first quadrant encircle the
        critical point (3, 2). Whether the trajectories are actually closed curves, or whether they slowly
        spiral in or out, cannot be definitely determined from the direction field. The origin appears to
        be a saddle point. Just as for the competition equations in Section 9.4, the coordinate axes are
        trajectories of Eqs. (1) or (2). Consequently, no other trajectory can cross a coordinate axis,
        which means that every solution starting in the first quadrant remains there for all time.
                     y
                      5
                      4
                      3
                      2
                      1
                      0            1        2         3         4         5         6      7   x
             FIGURE 9.5.1        Critical points and direction field for the predator–prey system (2).
           Next we examine the local behavior of solutions near each critical point. Near the origin
        we can neglect the nonlinear terms in Eqs. (2) to obtain the corresponding linear system
                                                                  
                                             d x         1     0        x
                                                    =                      .                           (4)
                                            dt y         0 −0.75        y
        The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of Eq. (4) are
                                                                                  
                                           (1)    1                          (2)    0
                                r1 = 1, ξ =          ;      r2 = −0.75,    ξ     =     ,               (5)
                                                  0                                 1
        so its general solution is                             
                                            x          1 t         0 −0.75t
                                               = c1       e + c2      e       .                        (6)
                                            y          0           1
Thus the origin is a saddle point both of the linear system (4) and of the nonlinear system (2)
and therefore is unstable. One pair of trajectories enters the origin along the y-axis; all other
trajectories depart from the neighborhood of the origin.
   To examine the critical point (3, 2), we can use the Jacobian matrix
                                                                                
                           Fx (x, y) Fy (x, y)         1 − 0.5y          −0.5x
                   J=                               =                                .           (7)
                           Gx (x, y) Gy (x, y)           0.25y      −0.75 + 0.25x
Evaluating J at the point (3, 2), we obtain the linear system
                                                            
                                     d u          0      −1.5    u
                                              =                        ,                         (8)
                                    dt v          0.5      0     v
where u = x − 3 and v = y − 2. The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of this system are
                      √                                       √                      
                        3i                 1√                    3i                1
               r1 =        , ξ (1) =              ;     r2 = −        , ξ (2) =    √ .           (9)
                       2                −i/ 3                    2               i/ 3
Since the eigenvalues are imaginary, the critical point (3, 2) is a center of the linear system
(8) and is therefore a stable critical point for that system. Recall from Section 9.3 that this
is one of the cases in which the behavior of the linear system may or may not carry over to
the nonlinear system, so the nature of the point (3, 2) for the nonlinear system (2) cannot be
determined from this information.
   The simplest way to find the trajectories of the linear system (8) is to divide the second of
Eqs. (8) by the first so as to obtain the differential equation
                                    dv      dv/dt      0.5u         u
                                        =           =        =− ,
                                    du      du/dt      −1.5v       3v
or
                                            u du + 3v dv = 0.                                   (10)
Consequently,
                                              u2 + 3v2 = k,                                     (11)
where k is an arbitrary nonnegative constant of integration. Thus the trajectories of the linear
system (8) are ellipses centered at the critical point and elongated somewhat in the horizontal
direction.
   Now let us return to the nonlinear system (2). Dividing the second of Eqs. (2) by the first,
we obtain
                                        dy     y(−0.75 + 0.25x)
                                            =                     .                             (12)
                                        dx         x(1 − 0.5y)
Equation (12) is a separable equation and can be put in the form
                                   1 − 0.5y          −0.75 + 0.25x
                                             dy =                    dx,
                                       y                   x
from which it follows that
                                  0.75 ln x + ln y − 0.5y − 0.25x = c,                          (13)
where c is a constant of integration. Although by using only elementary functions we cannot
solve Eq. (13) explicitly for either variable in terms of the other, it is possible to show that the
graph of the equation for a fixed value of c is a closed curve surrounding the critical point
(3, 2). Thus the critical point is also a center of the nonlinear system (2), and the predator and
prey populations exhibit a cyclic variation.
   Figure 9.5.2 shows a phase portrait of the system (2). For some initial conditions, the tra-
jectory represents small variations in x and y about the critical point and is almost elliptical
in shape, as the linear analysis suggests. For other initial conditions, the oscillations in x and y
are more pronounced, and the shape of the trajectory is significantly different from an ellipse.
Observe that the trajectories are traversed in the counterclockwise direction. The dependence
of x and y on t for a typical set of initial conditions is shown in Figure 9.5.3. Note that x and
y are periodic functions of t, as they must be since the trajectories are closed curves. Fur-
ther, the oscillation of the predator population lags behind that of the prey. Starting from a
state in which both predator and prey populations are relatively small, the prey first increase
because there is little predation. Then the predators, with abundant food, increase in pop-
ulation also. This causes heavier predation, and the prey tend to decrease. Finally, with a
diminished food supply, the predator population also decreases, and the system returns to the
original state.
            y
            4
            3
            2
            1
                      1        2         3         4        5       6        7           x
                      FIGURE 9.5.2 A phase portrait of the system (2).
           x, y
                                             Prey
                                             x(t)
              6
                                              Predator
              4                                 y(t)
              2
                           5          10          15          20         25             t
FIGURE 9.5.3 Variations of the prey and predator populations with time for the system (2).
   The general system (1) can be analyzed in exactly the same way as in the example.
The critical points of the system (1) are the solutions of
                          x(a − αy) = 0,           y(−c + γx) = 0,
that is, the points (0, 0) and (c/γ, a/α). We first examine the solutions of the
corresponding linear system near each critical point.
   In the neighborhood of the origin, the corresponding linear system is
                                                       
                                 d x             a    0     x
                                           =                   .                  (14)
                                dt y             0 −c       y
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors are
                                                                          
                              (1)        1                         (2)      0
                   r1 = a, ξ =               ;     r2 = −c,      ξ       =     ,  (15)
                                         0                                   1
so the general solution is
                                                      
                              x             1 at          0 −ct
                                   = c1          e + c2       e .                 (16)
                              y             0             1
Thus the origin is a saddle point and hence unstable. Entrance to the saddle point is
along the y-axis; all other trajectories depart from the neighborhood of the critical
point.
   Next consider the critical point (c/γ, a/α). The Jacobian matrix is
                                                            
                                         a − αy      −αx
                                J=                             .
                                           γy      −c + γx
Evaluating J at (c/γ, a/α), we obtain the approximate linear system
                                                            
                            d u                0    −αc/γ         u
                                      =                                ,          (17)
                           dt v             γa/α       0          v
where √ u = x − (c/γ) and v = y − (a/α). The eigenvalues of the system (17) are
r = ±i ac, so the critical point is a (stable) center of the linear system. To find
the trajectories of the system (17), we can divide the second equation by the first to
obtain
                                dv       dv/dt        (γa/α)u
                                     =            =−            ,                 (18)
                               du        du/dt        (αc/γ)v
or
                                  γ 2 au du + α2 cv dv = 0.                       (19)
Consequently,
                                     γ 2 au2 + α2 cv2 = k,                        (20)
where k is a nonnegative constant of integration. Thus the trajectories of the linear
system (17) are ellipses, just as in the example.
   Returning briefly to the nonlinear system (1), observe that it can be reduced to the
single equation
                               dy       dy/dt      y(−c + γx)
                                   =             =               .                (21)
                               dx       dx/dt       x(a − αy)
Equation (21) is separable and has the solution
                                 a ln y − αy + c ln x − γx = C,                                (22)
where C is a constant of integration. Again, it is possible to show that for fixed C, the
graph of Eq. (22) is a closed curve surrounding the critical point (c/γ, a/α). Thus this
critical point is also a center for the general nonlinear system (1).
   The cyclic variation of the predator and prey populations can be analyzed in more
detail when the deviations from the point (c/γ, a/α) are small and the linear system
(17) can be used. The solution of the system (17) can be written in the form
                                                          
                        c        √                      a c           √
                 u = K cos( ac t + φ),              v=        K sin( ac t + φ),                (23)
                        γ                               α a
where the constants K and φ are determined by the initial conditions. Thus
                                      c     c        √
                                x = + K cos( ac t + φ),
                                      γ     γ
                                                                                              (24)
                                      a     a c         √
                                y= +              K sin( ac t + φ).
                                      α α a
   These equations are good approximations for the nearly elliptical trajectories close
to the critical point (c/γ, a/α). We can use them to draw several conclusions about
the cyclic variation of the predator and prey on such trajectories.
                                                                                          √
1. The sizes of the predator and prey populations vary sinusoidally with period 2π/ ac. This
     period of oscillation is independent of the initial conditions.
2. The predator and prey populations are out of phase by one-quarter of a cycle. The prey
     leads and the predator lags, as explained in the example.
                                                                      √       √
3. The amplitudes of the oscillations are Kc/γ for the prey and a cK/α a for the predator
     and hence depend on the initial conditions as well as on the parameters of the problem.
4. The average populations of predator and prey over one complete cycle are c/γ and a/α,
     respectively. These are the same as the equilibrium populations; see Problem 10.
    Cyclic variations of predator and prey as predicted by Eqs. (1) have been observed
in nature. One striking example is described by Odum (pp. 191–192); based on the
records of the Hudson’s Bay Company of Canada, the abundance of lynx and snow-
shoe hare, as indicated by the number of pelts turned in over the period 1845–1935,
shows a distinct periodic variation with period of 9 to 10 years. The peaks of abun-
dance are followed by very rapid declines, and the peaks of abundance of the lynx
and hare are out of phase, with that of the hare preceding that of the lynx by a year
or more.
    Since the critical point (c/γ, a/α) is a center, we expect that small perturbations
of the Lotka–Volterra equations may well lead to solutions that are not periodic.
To put it another way, unless the Lotka–Volterra equations exactly describe a given
predator–prey relationship, the actual fluctuations of the populations may differ
substantially from those predicted by the Lotka-Volterra equations, due to small
inaccuracies in the model equations. This has led to many attempts8 to replace the
8 See the book by Brauer and Castillo-Chávez listed in the references for an extensive discussion of
alternative models for predator–prey relationships.
         Lotka–Volterra equations by other systems that are less susceptible to the effects of
         small perturbations. Problem 13 introduces one such alternative model.
             Another criticism of the Lotka–Volterra equations is that in the absence of
         the predator, the prey will grow without bound. This can be corrected by allow-
         ing for the natural inhibiting effect that an increasing population has on the growth
         rate of that population. For example, the first of Eqs. (1) can be modified so that
         when y = 0, it reduces to a logistic equation for x. The effects of this modification are
         explored in Problems 11 and 12. Problems 14 through 16 deal with harvesting in a
         predator–prey relationship. The results may seem rather counterintuitive.
             Finally, we repeat a warning stated earlier: relationships among species in the
         natural world are often complex and subtle. You should not expect too much of a
         simple system of two differential equations in describing such relationships. Even if
         you are convinced that the general form of the equations is sound, the determination
         of numerical values for the coefficients may present serious difficulties.
PROBLEMS Each of Problems 1 through 5 can be interpreted as describing the interaction of two species
         with population densities x and y. In each of these problems, carry out the following steps.
         (a) Draw a direction field and describe how solutions seem to behave.
         (b) Find the critical points.
         (c) For each critical point, find the corresponding linear system. Find the eigenvalues and
         eigenvectors of the linear system; classify each critical point as to type, and determine whether
         it is asymptotically stable, stable, or unstable.
         (d) Sketch the trajectories in the neighborhood of each critical point.
         (e) Draw a phase portrait for the system.
          (f) Determine the limiting behavior of x and y as t → ∞, and interpret the results in terms
         of the populations of the two species.
           1. dx/dt = x(1.5 − 0.5y)                          2. dx/dt = x(1 − 0.5y)
               dy/dt = y(−0.5 + x)                              dy/dt = y(−0.25 + 0.5x)
           3. dx/dt = x(1 − 0.5x − 0.5y)                     4. dx/dt = x(1.125 − x − 0.5y)
               dy/dt = y(−0.25 + 0.5x)                          dy/dt = y(−1 + x)
           5. dx/dt = x(−1 + 2.5x − 0.3y − x2 )
               dy/dt = y(−1.5 + x)
           6. In this problem we examine the phase difference between the cyclic variations of the
               predator and prey populations as given by Eqs. (24) of this section. Suppose we assume
               that K > 0 and that t is measured from the time that the prey population x is a maximum;
               then φ = 0.
                                                                                     √
               (a) Show that the predator population y is a maximum at t = π/2 ac = T/4, where T is
               the period of the oscillation.
               (b) When is the prey population increasing most rapidly? decreasing most rapidly? a
               minimum?
               (c) Answer the questions in part (b) for the predator population.
               (d) Draw a typical elliptic trajectory enclosing the point (c/γ, a/α), and mark on it the
               points found in parts (a), (b), and (c).
           7. (a) Find the ratio of the amplitudes of the oscillations of the prey and predator populations
               about the critical point (c/γ, a/α), using the approximation (24), which is valid for small
               oscillations. Observe that the ratio is independent of the initial conditions.
    (b) Evaluate the ratio found in part (a) for the system (2).
    (c) Estimate the amplitude ratio for the solution of the nonlinear system (2) shown in
    Figure 9.5.3. Does the result agree with that obtained from the linear approximation?
    (d) Determine the prey–predator amplitude ratio for other solutions of the system (2)
    —that is, for solutions satisfying other initial conditions. Is the ratio independent of the
    initial conditions?
 8. (a) Find the period of the oscillations of the prey and predator populations, using the
    approximation (24), which is valid for small oscillations. Note that the period is inde-
    pendent of the amplitude of the oscillations.
    (b) For the solution of the nonlinear system (2) shown in Figure 9.5.3, estimate the period
    as well as possible. Is the result the same as for the linear approximation?
    (c) Calculate other solutions of the system (2)—that is, solutions satisfying other initial
    conditions—and determine their periods. Is the period the same for all initial conditions?
 9. Consider the system
                         dx/dt = ax[1 − (y/2)],      dy/dt = by[−1 + (x/3)],
    where a and b are positive constants. Observe that this system is the same as in the example
    in the text if a = 1 and b = 0.75. Suppose the initial conditions are x(0) = 5 and y(0) = 2.
    (a) Let a = 1 and b = 1. Plot the trajectory in the phase plane, and determine (or esti-
    mate) the period of the oscillation.
    (b) Repeat part (a) for a = 3 and a = 1/3, with b = 1.
    (c) Repeat part (a) for b = 3 and b = 1/3, with a = 1.
    (d) Describe how the period and the shape of the trajectory depend on a and b.
10. The average sizes of the prey and predator populations are defined as
                                    A+T                       A+T
                                 1                          1
                             x=           x(t) dt,    y=            y(t) dt,
                                 T   A                     T   A
    respectively, where T is the period of a full cycle, and A is any nonnegative constant.
    (a) Using the approximation (24), which is valid near the critical point, show that x = c/γ
    and y = a/α.
    (b) For the solution of the nonlinear system (2) shown in Figure 9.5.3, estimate x and y as
    well as you can. Try to determine whether x and y are given by c/γ and a/α, respectively,
    in this case.
    Hint: Consider how you might estimate the value of an integral even though you do not
    have a formula for the integrand.
    (c) Calculate other solutions of the system (2)—that is, solutions satisfying other initial
    conditions—and determine x and y for these solutions. Are the values of x and y the same
    for all solutions?
    In Problems 11 and 12, we consider the effect of modifying the equation for the prey x by
    including a term −σx2 so that this equation reduces to a logistic equation in the absence of
    the predator y. Problem 11 deals with a specific system of this kind, and Problem 12 takes
    up this modification to the general Lotka–Volterra system. The systems in Problems 3 and
    4 are other examples of this type.
11. Consider the system
                          x = x(1 − σx − 0.5y),      y = y(−0.75 + 0.25x),
    where σ > 0. Observe that this system is a modification of the system (2) in Example 1.
     (a) Find all of the critical points. How does their location change as σ increases from zero?
     Observe that there is a critical point in the interior of the first quadrant only if σ < 1/3.
     (b) Determine the type and stability property of each critical point. Find the value
     σ1 < 1/3 where the nature of the critical point in the interior of the first quadrant changes.
     Describe the change that takes place in this critical point as σ passes through σ1 .
     (c) Draw a direction field and phase portrait for a value of σ between zero and σ1 ; for a
     value of σ between σ1 and 1/3.
     (d) Describe the effect on the two populations as σ increases from zero to 1/3.
12. Consider the system
                            dx/dt = x(a − σx − αy),        dy/dt = y(−c + γx),
     where a, σ, α, c, and γ are positive constants.
     (a) Find all critical points of the given system. How does their location change as σ
     increases from zero? Assume that a/σ > c/γ, that is, σ < aγ/c. Why is this assumption
     necessary?
     (b) Determine the nature and stability characteristics of each critical point.
     (c) Show that there is a value of σ between zero and aγ/c where the critical point in the
     interior of the first quadrant changes from a spiral point to a node.
     (d) Describe the effect on the two populations as σ increases from zero to aγ/c.
13. In the Lotka–Volterra equations, the interaction between the two species is modeled by
     terms proportional to the product xy of the respective populations. If the prey population is
     much larger than the predator population, this may overstate the interaction; for example,
     a predator may hunt only when it is hungry and ignore the prey at other times. In this
     problem we consider an alternative model proposed by Rosenzweig and MacArthur.9
     (a) Consider the system
                                                                 
                                             2y                            x
                        x = x 1 − 0.2x −           ,      y = y −0.25 +           .
                                            x+6                           x+6
     Find all of the critical points of this system.
     (b) Determine the type and stability characteristics of each critical point.
     (c) Draw a direction field and phase portrait for this system.
     Harvesting in a Predator–Prey Relationship. In a predator–prey situation, it may happen
     that one or perhaps both species are valuable sources of food. Or, the prey species may
     be regarded as a pest, leading to efforts to reduce its numbers. In a constant-effort model
     of harvesting, we introduce a term −E1 x in the prey equation and a term −E2 y in the
     predator equation, where E1 and E2 are measures of the effort invested in harvesting
     the respective species. A constant-yield model of harvesting is obtained by including the
     term −H1 in the prey equation and the term −H2 in the predator equation. The constants
     E1 , E2 , H1 , and H2 are always nonnegative. Problems 14 and 15 deal with constant-effort
     harvesting, and Problem 16 deals with constant-yield harvesting.
14. Applying a constant-effort model of harvesting to the Lotka–Volterra equations (1), we
     obtain the system
                             x = x(a − αy − E1 ),     y = y(−c + γx − E2 ).
     When there is no harvesting, the equilibrium solution is (c/γ, a/α).
9 See the book by Brauer and Castillo-Chávez for further details.
                   (a) Before doing any mathematical analysis, think about the situation intuitively. How do
                   you think the populations will change if the prey alone is harvested? if the predator alone
                   is harvested? if both are harvested?
                   (b) How does the equilibrium solution change if the prey is harvested, but not the preda-
                   tor (E1 > 0, E2 = 0)?
                   (c) How does the equilibrium solution change if the predator is harvested, but not the
                   prey (E1 = 0, E2 > 0)?
                   (d) How does the equilibrium solution change if both are harvested (E1 > 0, E2 > 0)?
               15. If we modify the Lotka–Volterra equations by including a self-limiting term −σx2 in the
                   prey equation, and then assume constant-effort harvesting, we obtain the equations
                                      x = x(a − σx − αy − E1 ),      y = y(−c + γx − E2 ).
                   In the absence of harvesting, the equilibrium solution of interest is x = c/γ,
                   y = (a/α) − (σc)/(αγ).
                   (a) How does the equilibrium solution change if the prey is harvested, but not the preda-
                   tor (E1 > 0, E2 = 0)?
                   (b) How does the equilibrium solution change if the predator is harvested, but not the
                   prey (E1 = 0, E2 > 0)?
                   (c) How does the equilibrium solution change if both are harvested (E1 > 0, E2 > 0)?
               16. In this problem we apply a constant-yield model of harvesting to the situation in Example 1.
                   Consider the system
                                     x = x(1 − 0.5y) − H1 ,     y = y(−0.75 + 0.25x) − H2 ,
                   where H1 and H2 are nonnegative constants. Recall that if H1 = H2 = 0, then (3, 2) is an
                   equilibrium solution for this system.
                   (a) Before doing any mathematical analysis, think about the situation intuitively. How do
                   you think the populations will change if the prey alone is harvested? if the predator alone
                   is harvested? if both are harvested?
                   (b) How does the equilibrium solution change if the prey is harvested, but not the preda-
                   tor (H1 > 0, H2 = 0)?
                   (c) How does the equilibrium solution change if the predator is harvested, but not the
                   prey (H1 = 0, H2 > 0)?
                   (d) How does the equilibrium solution change if both are harvested (H1 > 0, H2 > 0)?
9.6 Liapunov’s Second Method
               In Section 9.3 we showed how the stability of a critical point of a locally linear
               system can usually be determined from a study of the corresponding linear system.
               However, no conclusion can be drawn when the critical point is a center of the
               corresponding linear system. Examples of this situation are the undamped pendulum,
               Eqs. (1) and (2) below, and the predator–prey problem discussed in Section 9.5. Also,
               for an asymptotically stable critical point, it may be important to investigate the
               basin of attraction—that is, the domain such that all solutions starting within that
               domain approach the critical point. The theory of locally linear systems provides no
               information about this question.
   In this section we discuss another approach, known as Liapunov’s10 second method
or direct method. The method is referred to as a direct method because no knowledge
of the solution of the system of differential equations is required. Rather, conclusions
about the stability or instability of a critical point are obtained by constructing a suit-
able auxiliary function. The technique is a very powerful one that provides a more
global type of information—for example, an estimate of the extent of the basin of
attraction of a critical point. Liapunov’s second method can also be used to study
systems of equations that are not locally linear; however, we will not discuss such
problems.
The Pendulum Equations. Basically, Liapunov’s second method is a generalization of
two physical principles for conservative systems, namely, (i) a rest position is stable
if the potential energy is a local minimum, otherwise it is unstable, and (ii) the total
energy is a constant during any motion. To illustrate these concepts, again consider
the undamped pendulum (a conservative mechanical system), which is governed
by the equation
                                         d2 θ     g
                                            2
                                              + sin θ = 0.                                             (1)
                                         dt      L
The corresponding system of first order equations is
                                   dx               dy        g
                                       = y,            = − sin x,                                      (2)
                                   dt               dt        L
where x = θ and y = dθ/dt. If we omit an arbitrary constant, the potential energy U
is the work done in lifting the pendulum above its lowest position, namely,
                                    U(x, y) = mgL(1 − cos x);                                          (3)
see Figure 9.2.2. The critical points of the system (2) are x = ±nπ, y = 0, for
n = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , corresponding to θ = ±nπ, dθ/dt = 0. Physically, we expect the
points x = 0, y = 0; x = ±2π, y = 0; . . ., corresponding to θ = 0, ±2π, . . . , to be stable,
since for them the pendulum bob is vertical with the weight down. Further, we expect
the points x = ±π, y = 0; x = ±3π, y = 0; . . . , corresponding to θ = ±π, ±3π, . . . , to
be unstable, since for them the pendulum bob is vertical with the weight up. This
agrees with statement (i), for at the former points U is a minimum equal to zero, and
at the latter points U is a maximum equal to 2mgL.
   Next consider the total energy V, which is the sum of the potential energy U and
the kinetic energy 21 mL2 (dθ/dt)2 . In terms of x and y,
                             V(x, y) = mgL(1 − cos x) + 21 mL2 y2 .                                    (4)
10Alexander M. Liapunov (1857–1918), a student of Chebyshev at St. Petersburg, taught at the Uni-
versity of Kharkov from 1885 to 1901, when he became an academician in applied mathematics at the
St. Petersburg Academy of Sciences. In 1917 he moved to Odessa because of his wife’s frail health. His
research in stability encompassed both theoretical analysis and applications to various physical problems.
His second method formed part of his most influential work, General Problem of Stability of Motion,
published in 1892.
On a trajectory corresponding to a solution x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) of Eqs. (2), V can be
considered a function of t. The derivative of V[φ(t), ψ(t)] with respect to t is called
the rate of change of V following the trajectory. By the chain rule,
               dV[φ(t), ψ(t)]                        dφ(t)                   dψ(t)
                                   = Vx [φ(t), ψ(t)]       + Vy [φ(t), ψ(t)]
                      dt                              dt                      dt
                                                  dx          dy
                                   = (mgL sin x)      + mL2 y ,                             (5)
                                                   dt         dt
where it is understood that x = φ(t), y = ψ(t). Finally, substituting in Eq. (5) for dx/dt
and dy/dt from Eqs. (2), we find that dV/dt = 0. Hence V is a constant along any
trajectory of the system (2), which is statement (ii).
   It is important to note that at any point (x, y), the rate of change of V along the
trajectory through that point was computed without actually solving the system (2).
It is precisely this fact that enables us to use Liapunov’s second method for systems
whose solution we do not know, which is the main reason for its importance.
   At the stable critical points, x = ±2nπ, y = 0, n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , the energy V is zero.
If the initial state (x1 , y1 ) of the pendulum is sufficiently near a stable critical point,
then the energy V(x1 , y1 ) is small, and the motion (trajectory) associated with this
energy stays close to the critical point. It can be shown that if V(x1 , y1 ) is sufficiently
small, then the trajectory is closed and contains the critical point. For example, sup-
pose that (x1 , y1 ) is near (0, 0) and that V(x1 , y1 ) is very small. The equation of the
trajectory with energy V(x1 , y1 ) is
                     V(x, y) = mgL(1 − cos x) + 21 mL2 y2 = V(x1 , y1 ).
For x small, we have 1 − cos x = 1 − (1 − x2 /2! + · · ·) ∼     = x2 /2. Thus the equation of
the trajectory is approximately
                                 1
                                 2
                                   mgLx2 + 21 mL2 y2 = V(x1 , y1 ),
or
                                    x2                   y2
                                               +                    = 1.
                           2V(x1 , y1 )/mgL 2V(x1 , y1 )/mL2
This is an ellipse enclosing the critical point (0, 0); the smaller V(x1 , y1 ) is, the smaller
are the major and minor axes of the ellipse. Physically, the closed trajectory corre-
sponds to a solution that is periodic in time—the motion is a small oscillation about
the equilibrium point.
   If damping is present, however, it is natural to expect that the amplitude of the
motion decays in time and that the stable critical point (center) becomes an asymp-
totically stable critical point (spiral point). See the phase portrait for the damped
pendulum in Figure 9.3.5. This can almost be argued from a consideration of dV/dt.
For the damped pendulum, the total energy is still given by Eq. (4), but now, from
Eqs. (13) of Section 9.2, dx/dt = y and dy/dt = −(g/L) sin x − (c/mL)y. Substituting
for dx/dt and dy/dt in Eq. (5) gives dV/dt = −cLy2 ≤ 0. Thus the energy is nonin-
creasing along any trajectory, and except for the line y = 0, the motion is such that
the energy decreases. Hence each trajectory must approach a point of minimum
energy—a stable equilibrium point. If dV/dt < 0 instead of dV/dt ≤ 0, it is reason-
able to expect that this would be true for all trajectories that start sufficiently close
to the origin.
        General Systems. To pursue these ideas further, consider the autonomous system
                                   dx/dt = F(x, y),        dy/dt = G(x, y),                       (6)
        and suppose that the point x = 0, y = 0 is an asymptotically stable critical point.
        Then there exists some domain D containing (0, 0) such that every trajectory that
        starts in D must approach the origin as t → ∞. Suppose that there exists an “energy”
        function V such that V ≥ 0 for (x, y) in D with V = 0 only at the origin. Since each
        trajectory in D approaches the origin as t → ∞, then following any particular trajec-
        tory, V decreases to zero as t approaches infinity. The type of result we want to prove
        is essentially the converse: if, on every trajectory, V decreases to zero as t increases,
        then the trajectories must approach the origin as t → ∞, and hence the origin is
        asymptotically stable. First, however, it is necessary to make several definitions.
           Let V be defined on some domain D containing the origin. Then V is said to
        be positive definite on D if V(0, 0) = 0 and V(x, y) > 0 for all other points in D.
        Similarly, V is said to be negative definite on D if V(0, 0) = 0 and V(x, y) < 0 for all
        other points in D. If the inequalities > and < are replaced by ≥ and ≤, then V is
        said to be positive semidefinite and negative semidefinite, respectively. We emphasize
        that when we speak of a positive definite (negative definite, ...) function on a domain
        D containing the origin,the function must be zero at the origin in addition to satisfying
        the proper inequality at all other points in D.
        The function
EXAMPLE                                      V(x, y) = sin(x2 + y2 )
   1    is positive definite on x2 + y2 < π/2 since V(0, 0) = 0 and V(x, y) > 0 for 0 < x2 + y2 < π/2.
        However, the function
                                               V(x, y) = (x + y)2
        is only positive semidefinite since V(x, y) = 0 on the line y = −x.
           We also want to consider the function
                                V̇(x, y) = Vx (x, y)F(x, y) + Vy (x, y)G(x, y),                   (7)
        where F and G are the same functions as in Eqs. (6). We choose this notation
        because V̇(x, y) can be identified as the rate of change of V along the trajectory
        of the system (6) that passes through the point (x, y). That is, if x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) is
        a solution of the system (6), then
                       dV[φ(t), ψ(t)]                     dφ(t)                    dψ(t)
                                        = Vx [φ(t), ψ(t)]        + Vy [φ(t), ψ(t)]
                             dt                             dt                      dt
                                        = Vx (x, y)F(x, y) + Vy (x, y)G(x, y)
                                        = V̇(x, y).                                               (8)
        The function V̇ is sometimes referred to as the derivative of V with respect to the
        system (6).
           We now state two Liapunov theorems, the first dealing with stability, the second
        with instability.
Theorem 9.6.1 Suppose that the autonomous system (6) has an isolated critical point at the ori-
              gin. If there exists a function V that is continuous and has continuous first partial
              derivatives, that is positive definite, and for which the function V̇ given by Eq. (7)
              is negative definite on some domain D in the xy-plane containing (0, 0), then the
              origin is an asymptotically stable critical point. If V̇ is negative semidefinite, then
              the origin is a stable critical point.
Theorem 9.6.2 Let the origin be an isolated critical point of the autonomous system (6). Let V be a
              function that is continuous and has continuous first partial derivatives. Suppose that
              V(0, 0) = 0 and that in every neighborhood of the origin there is at least one point
              at which V is positive (negative). If there exists a domain D containing the origin
              such that the function V̇ given by Eq. (7) is positive definite (negative definite) on
              D, then the origin is an unstable critical point.
                 The function V is called a Liapunov function. Before sketching geometrical argu-
              ments for Theorems 9.6.1 and 9.6.2, we note that the difficulty in using these theorems
              is that they tell us nothing about how to construct a Liapunov function, assuming that
              one exists. In cases where the autonomous system (6) represents a physical prob-
              lem, it is natural to consider first the actual total energy function of the system as
              a possible Liapunov function. However, Theorems 9.6.1 and 9.6.2 are applicable in
              cases where the concept of physical energy is not pertinent. In such cases a judicious
              trial-and-error approach may be necessary.
                 Now consider the second part of Theorem 9.6.1—that is, the case V̇ ≤ 0. Let
              c ≥ 0 be a constant, and consider the curve in the xy-plane given by V(x, y) = c.
              For c = 0 the curve reduces to the single point x = 0, y = 0. We assume that if
              0 < c1 < c2 , then the curve V(x, y) = c1 contains the origin and lies within the curve
              V(x, y) = c2 , as illustrated in Figure 9.6.1a. We show that a trajectory starting inside
              a closed curve V(x, y) = c cannot cross to the outside. Thus, given a circle of radius
               about the origin, by taking c sufficiently small, we can ensure that every trajectory
              starting inside the closed curve V(x, y) = c stays within the circle of radius ; indeed,
              it stays within the closed curve V(x, y) = c itself. Thus the origin is a stable critical
              point.
                 To show this, recall from calculus that the vector
                                              ∇V(x, y) = Vx (x, y)i + Vy (x, y)j,                          (9)
              known as the gradient of V, is normal to the curve V(x, y) = c and points in the direc-
              tion of increasing V. In the present case, V increases outward from the origin, so ∇V
              points away from the origin, as indicated in Figure 9.6.1b. Next, consider a trajectory
              x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) of the system (6), and recall that the vector T(t) = φ (t)i + ψ (t)j
              is tangent to the trajectory at each point; see Figure 9.6.1b. Let x1 = φ(t1 ), y1 = ψ(t1 )
              be a point of intersection of the trajectory and a closed curve V(x, y) = c. At this
              point φ (t1 ) = F(x1 , y1 ), ψ (t1 ) = G(x1 , y1 ), so from Eq. (7) we obtain
                               V̇(x1 , y1 ) = Vx (x1 , y1 )φ (t1 ) + Vy (x1 , y1 )ψ (t1 )
                                            = [Vx (x1 , y1 )i + Vy (x1 , y1 )j] · [φ (t1 )i + ψ (t1 )j]
                                            = ∇V(x1 , y1 ) · T(t1 ).                                      (10)
                   y                                                                y
                                                                                             V(x, y) = c
                c=0                 x                                                                              x
                        c1                                                  (x1, y1)
                             c2
                                                        x = φ (t)
                                                        y = ψ (t)
                      0 < c 1 < c2                                                      d φ (t1)    dψ (t )
                                                                                          dt
                                                                                                 i + dt 1 j = T(t1)
                                           Vx(x1, y1) i + Vy(x1, y1) j = V(x1, y1)
                    (a)                                                              (b)
                FIGURE 9.6.1 (a) The curves V(x, y) = c1 and V(x, y) = c2 with 0 < c1 < c2 .
                          (b) Geometrical interpretation of Liapunov’s second method.
           Thus V̇(x1 , y1 ) is the scalar product of the vector ∇V(x1 , y1 ) and the vector
        T(t1 ). Since V̇(x1 , y1 ) ≤ 0, it follows that the cosine of the angle between ∇V(x1 , y1 )
        and T(t1 ) is also less than or equal to zero; hence the angle itself is in the range
        [π/2, 3π/2]. Thus the direction of motion on the trajectory is inward with respect to
        V(x1 , y1 ) = c or, at worst, tangent to this curve. Trajectories starting inside a closed
        curve V(x1 , y1 ) = c (no matter how small c is) cannot escape, so the origin is a sta-
        ble point. If V̇(x1 , y1 ) < 0, then the trajectories passing through points on the curve
        are actually pointed inward. As a consequence, it can be shown that trajectories
        starting sufficiently close to the origin must approach the origin; hence the origin is
        asymptotically stable.
           A geometrical argument for Theorem 9.6.2 follows in a somewhat similar manner.
        Briefly, suppose that V̇ is positive definite, and suppose that given any circle about the
        origin, there is an interior point (x1 , y1 ) at which V(x1 , y1 ) > 0. Consider a trajectory
        that starts at (x1 , y1 ). It follows from Eq. (8) that along this trajectory, V must increase
        since V̇(x1 , y1 ) > 0; furthermore, since V(x1 , y1 ) > 0, the trajectory cannot approach
        the origin because V(0, 0) = 0. This shows that the origin cannot be asymptotically
        stable. By further exploiting the fact that V̇(x, y) > 0, it is possible to show that the
        origin is an unstable point; however, we will not pursue this argument.
        Use Theorem 9.6.1 to show that (0, 0) is a stable critical point for the undamped pendulum
EXAMPLE equations (2). Also use Theorem 9.6.2 to show that (π, 0) is an unstable critical point.
   2       Let V be the total energy given by Eq. (4):
                                         V(x, y) = mgL(1 − cos x) + 21 mL2 y2 .                                  (4)
        If we take D to be the domain −π/2 < x < π/2, −∞ < y < ∞, then V is positive there
        except at the origin, where it is zero. Thus V is positive definite on D. Further, as we have
        already seen,
                                    V̇ = (mgL sin x)(y) + (mL2 y)(−g sin x)/L = 0
        for all x and y. Thus V̇ is negative semidefinite on D. Consequently, by the last statement
        in Theorem 9.6.1, the origin is a stable critical point for the undamped pendulum. Observe
        that this conclusion cannot be obtained from Theorem 9.3.2 because (0, 0) is a center for the
        corresponding linear system.
                 Now consider the critical point (π, 0). The Liapunov function given by Eq. (4) is no longer
              suitable because Theorem 9.6.2 calls for a function V for which V̇ is either positive or negative
              definite. To analyze the point (π, 0), it is convenient to move this point to the origin by the
              change of variables x = π + u, y = v. Then the differential equations (2) become
                                                                          g
                                                 du/dt = v,    dv/dt =      sin u,                         (11)
                                                                         L
              and the critical point is (0, 0) in the uv-plane. Consider the function
                                                         V(u, v) = v sin u                                 (12)
              and let D be the domain −π/4 < u < π/4, −∞ < v < ∞. Then
                               V̇ = (v cos u)(v) + (sin u)[(g/L) sin u] = v2 cos u + (g/L) sin2 u          (13)
              is positive definite in D. The only remaining question is whether there are points in every
              neighborhood of the origin where V itself is positive. From Eq. (12) we see that V(u, v) > 0
              in the first quadrant (where both sin u and v are positive) and in the third quadrant (where
              both are negative). Thus the conditions of Theorem 9.6.2 are satisfied, and the point (0, 0) in
              the uv-plane, corresponding to the point (π, 0) in the xy-plane, is unstable.
                 The damped pendulum equations are discussed in Problem 7.
                 From a practical point of view, we are often interested in the basin of attraction.
              The following theorem provides some information on this subject.
Theorem 9.6.3 Let the origin be an isolated critical point of the autonomous system (6). Let the
              function V be continuous and have continuous first partial derivatives. If there is a
              bounded domain DK containing the origin where V(x, y) < K for some positive K,
              V is positive definite, and V̇ is negative definite, then every solution of Eqs. (6) that
              starts at a point in DK approaches the origin as t approaches infinity.
                 In other words, Theorem 9.6.3 says that if x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) is the solution of
              Eqs. (6) for initial data lying in DK , then (x, y) approaches the critical point (0, 0) as
              t → ∞. Thus DK gives a region of asymptotic stability; of course, it may not be the
              entire basin of attraction. This theorem is proved by showing that (i) there are no
              periodic solutions of the system (6) in DK , and (ii) there are no other critical points
              in DK . It then follows that trajectories starting in DK cannot escape and therefore
              must tend to the origin as t tends to infinity.
                 Theorems 9.6.1 and 9.6.2 give sufficient conditions for stability and instability,
              respectively, but these conditions are not necessary. Also, our failure to find a suit-
              able Liapunov function does not mean that there is no such function. Unfortunately,
              there are no general methods for the construction of Liapunov functions; how-
              ever, there has been extensive work on the construction of Liapunov functions for
              special classes of equations. An elementary algebraic result that is often useful in
              constructing positive definite or negative definite functions is stated without proof
              in the following theorem.
Theorem 9.6.4 The function
                                                V(x, y) = ax2 + bxy + cy2                                 (14)
              is positive definite if, and only if,
                                               a>0        and     4ac − b2 > 0                            (15)
              and is negative definite if, and only if,
                                               a<0       and      4ac − b2 > 0.                           (16)
                 The use of Theorem 9.6.4 is illustrated in the following example.
              Show that the critical point (0, 0) of the autonomous system
 EXAMPLE
                                          dx/dt = −x − xy2 ,         dy/dt = −y − x2 y                      (17)
      3
              is asymptotically stable.
                 We try to construct a Liapunov function of the form (14). Then Vx (x, y) = 2ax + by,
              Vy (x, y) = bx + 2cy, so
                             V̇(x, y) = (2ax + by)(−x − xy2 ) + (bx + 2cy)(−y − x2 y)
                                                                                                
                                      = − 2a(x2 + x2 y2 ) + b(2xy + xy3 + x3 y) + 2c(y2 + x2 y2 ) .
              If we choose b = 0, and a and c to be any positive numbers, then V̇ is negative definite and V
              is positive definite by Theorem 9.6.4. Thus, by Theorem 9.6.1, the origin is an asymptotically
              stable critical point.
              Consider the system
 EXAMPLE
                                                 dx/dt = x(1 − x − y),
      4                                                                                                     (18)
                                                 dy/dt = y(0.75 − y − 0.5x).
              In Example 1 of Section 9.4, we found that this system models a certain pair of competing
              species and that the critical point (0.5, 0.5) is asymptotically stable. Confirm this conclusion by
              finding a suitable Liapunov function.
                 It is helpful to transform the point (0.5, 0.5) to the origin. To this end, let
                                                x = 0.5 + u,        y = 0.5 + v.                            (19)
              Then, substituting for x and y in Eqs. (18), we obtain the new system
                                             du/dt = −0.5u − 0.5v − u2 − uv,
                                                                                                            (20)
                                             dv/dt = −0.25u − 0.5v − 0.5uv − v2 .
              To keep the calculations relatively simple, consider the function V(u, v) = u2 + v2 as a possible
              Liapunov function. This function is clearly positive definite, so we need only to determine
         whether there is a region containing the origin in the uv-plane where the derivative V̇ with
         respect to the system (20) is negative definite. We compute V̇(u, v) and find that
                                       du       dv
                     V̇(u, v) = Vu        + Vv
                                       dt        dt
                                = 2u(−0.5u − 0.5v − u2 − uv) + 2v(−0.25u − 0.5v − 0.5uv − v2 ),
         or
                                                                                                 
                               V̇(u, v) = − (u2 + 1.5uv + v2 ) + (2u3 + 2u2 v + uv2 + 2v3 ) ,                      (21)
         where we have collected together the quadratic and cubic terms. We want to show that the
         expression in square brackets in Eq. (21) is positive definite, at least for u and v sufficiently
         small. Observe that the quadratic terms can be written as
                                      u2 + 1.5uv + v2 = 0.25(u2 + v2 ) + 0.75(u + v)2 ,                            (22)
         so these terms are positive definite. On the other hand, the cubic terms in Eq. (21) may be of
         either sign. Thus we must show that, in some neighborhood of u = 0, v = 0, the cubic terms
         are smaller in magnitude than the quadratic terms; that is,
                                  3                       
                                 2u + 2u2 v + uv2 + 2v3  < 0.25(u2 + v2 ) + 0.75(u + v)2 .                       (23)
         To estimate the left side of Eq. (23), we introduce polar coordinates u = r cos θ, v = r sin θ.
         Then
                3                                                                                     
               2u + 2u2 v + uv2 + 2v3  = r 3  2 cos3 θ + 2 cos2 θ sin θ + cos θ sin2 θ + 2 sin3 θ 
                                                                                                                
                                              ≤ r 3 2| cos3 θ| + 2 cos2 θ| sin θ| + | cos θ| sin2 θ + 2| sin3 θ|
                                              ≤ 7r 3 ,
         since | sin θ|, | cos θ| ≤ 1. To satisfy Eq. (23), it is now certainly sufficient to satisfy the more
         stringent requirement
                                            7r 3 < 0.25(u2 + v2 ) = 0.25r 2 = 41 r 2 ,
         which yields r < 1/28. Thus, at least in this disk, the hypotheses of Theorem 9.6.1 are satisfied,
         so the origin is an asymptotically stable critical point of the system (20). The same is then true
         of the critical point (0.5, 0.5) of the original system (18).
            If we refer to Theorem 9.6.3, the preceding argument also shows that the disk with center
         (0.5, 0.5) and radius 1/28 is a region of asymptotic stability for the system (18). This is a
         severe underestimate of the full basin of attraction, as the discussion in Section 9.4 shows.
         To obtain a better estimate of the actual basin of attraction from Theorem 9.6.3, we would
         have to estimate the terms in Eq. (23) more accurately, or use a better (and presumably more
         complicated) Liapunov function, or both.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 4, construct a suitable Liapunov function of the form ax2 + cy2 ,
         where a and c are to be determined. Then show that the critical point at the origin is of the
         indicated type.
           1. dx/dt = −x3 + xy2 ,          dy/dt = −2x2 y − y3 ;        asymptotically stable
           2. dx/dt = − 2 x + 2xy2 ,
                             1 3
                                               dy/dt = −y3 ;       asymptotically stable
           3. dx/dt = −x3 + 2y3 ,          dy/dt = −2xy2 ;        stable (at least)
           4. dx/dt = x − y ,
                           3      3
                                         dy/dt = 2xy2 + 4x2 y + 2y3 ;        unstable
5. Consider the system of equations
                           dx/dt = y − xf (x, y),        dy/dt = −x − yf (x, y),
   where f is continuous and has continuous first partial derivatives. Show that if f (x, y) > 0
   in some neighborhood of the origin, then the origin is an asymptotically stable critical
   point, and that if f (x, y) < 0 in some neighborhood of the origin, then the origin is an
   unstable critical point.
   Hint: Construct a Liapunov function of the form c(x2 + y2 ).
6. A generalization of the undamped pendulum equation is
                                            d2 u/dt 2 + g(u) = 0,                                  (i)
   where g(0) = 0, g(u) > 0 for 0 < u < k, and g(u) < 0 for −k < u < 0; that is, ug(u) > 0
   for u = 0, −k < u < k. Notice that g(u) = sin u has this property on (−π/2, π/2).
   (a) Letting x = u, y = du/dt, write Eq. (i) as a system of two equations, and show that
   x = 0, y = 0 is a critical point.
   (b) Show that
                                                  x
                             V(x, y) = 21 y2 +       g(s) ds,     −k < x < k                      (ii)
                                                  0
   is positive definite, and use this result to show that the critical point (0, 0) is stable.
   Note that the Liapunov function V given by Eq. (ii) corresponds to the energy function
   V(x, y) = 21 y2 + (1 − cos x) for the case g(u) = sin u.
7. By introducing suitable dimensionless variables, we can write the system of nonlinear
   equations for the damped pendulum [Eqs. (8) of Section 9.3] as
                                  dx/dt = y,         dy/dt = −y − sin x.
   (a) Show that the origin is a critical point.
   (b) Show that although V(x, y) = x2 + y2 is positive definite, V̇(x, y) takes on both positive
   and negative values in any domain containing the origin, so V is not a Liapunov function.
   Hint: x − sin x > 0 for x > 0, and x − sin x < 0 for x < 0. Consider these cases with y
   positive but y so small that y2 can be ignored compared to y.
   (c) Using the energy function V(x, y) = 21 y2 + (1 − cos x) mentioned in Problem 6(b),
   show that the origin is a stable critical point. Since there is damping in the system, we
   can expect that the origin is asymptotically stable. However, it is not possible to draw this
   conclusion using this Liapunov function.
   (d) To show asymptotic stability, it is necessary to construct a better Liapunov function
   than the one used in part (c). Show that V(x, y) = 21 (x + y)2 + x2 + 21 y2 is such a Liapunov
   function, and conclude that the origin is an asymptotically stable critical point.
   Hint: From Taylor’s formula with a remainder, it follows that sin x = x − αx3 /3!, where α
   depends on x but 0 < α < 1 for −π/2 < x < π/2. Then, letting x = r cos θ, y = r sin θ, show
   that V̇(r cos θ, r sin θ) = −r 2 [1 + h(r, θ)], where |h(r, θ)| < 1 if r is sufficiently small.
8. The Liénard equation (Problem 30 of Section 9.3) is
                                        d2 u          du
                                             + c(u)      + g(u) = 0,
                                        dt 2          dt
   where g satisfies the conditions of Problem 6 and c(u) ≥ 0. Show that the point u = 0,
   du/dt = 0 is a stable critical point.
  9. (a) A special case of the Liénard equation of Problem 8 is
                                              d2 u du
                                                    +      + g(u) = 0,
                                               dt 2     dt
     where g satisfies the conditions of Problem 6. Letting x = u, y = du/dt, show that the
     origin is a critical point of the resulting system. This equation can be interpreted as describ-
     ing the motion of a spring–mass system with damping proportional to the velocity and a
     nonlinear restoring force. Using the Liapunov function of Problem 6, show that the origin
     is a stable critical point, but note that even with damping, we cannot conclude asymptotic
     stability using this Liapunov function.
     (b) Asymptotic stability of the critical point (0, 0) can be shown by constructing a better
     Liapunov function, as was done in part (d) of Problem 7. However, the analysis for a
     general function g is somewhat sophisticated, and we mention only that an appropriate
     form for V is
                                                                      x
                                    V(x, y) = 21 y2 + Ayg(x) +           g(s) ds,
                                                                      0
     where A is a positive constant to be chosen so that V is positive definite and V̇ is negative
     definite. For the pendulum problem g(x) = sin x, use V as given by the preceding equation
     with A = 21 to show that the origin is asymptotically stable.
     Hint: Use sin x = x − αx3 /3! and cos x = 1 − βx2 /2!, where α and β depend on x, and
     0 < α < 1 and 0 < β < 1 for −π/2 < x < π/2; let x = r cos θ, y = r sin θ, and show
     that V̇(r cos θ, r sin θ) = − 21 r 2 [1 + 21 sin 2θ + h(r, θ)], where |h(r, θ)| < 21 if r is sufficiently
     small. To show that V is positive definite, use cos x = 1 − x2 /2 + γx4 /4!, where γ depends
     on x, and 0 < γ < 1 for −π/2 < x < π/2.
In Problems 10 and 11, we will prove part of Theorem 9.3.2: If the critical point (0, 0) of the
locally linear system
                dx/dt = a11 x + a12 y + F1 (x, y),         dy/dt = a21 x + a22 y + G1 (x, y)               (i)
is an asymptotically stable critical point of the corresponding linear system
                            dx/dt = a11 x + a12 y,         dy/dt = a21 x + a22 y,                         (ii)
then it is an asymptotically stable critical point of the locally linear system (i). Problem 12
deals with the corresponding result for instability.
10. Consider the linear system (ii).
     (a) Since (0, 0) is an asymptotically stable critical point, show that a11 + a22 < 0 and
     a11 a22 − a12 a21 > 0. (See Problem 21 of Section 9.1.)
     (b) Construct a Liapunov function V(x, y) = Ax2 + Bxy + Cy2 such that V is positive
     definite and V̇ is negative definite. One way to ensure that V̇ is negative definite is to
     choose A, B, and C so that V̇(x, y) = −x2 − y2 . Show that this leads to the result
                              a2 + a222 + (a11 a22 − a12 a21 )               a12 a22 + a11 a21
                      A = − 21                                  ,       B=                     ,
                                              2                                     
                              a2 + a212 + (a11 a22 − a12 a21 )
                      C = − 11                                  ,
                                              2
     where  = (a11 + a22 )(a11 a22 − a12 a21 ).
                    (c) Using the result of part (a), show that A > 0, and then show (several steps of algebra
                    are required) that
                                           (a211 + a212 + a221 + a222 )(a11 a22 − a12 a21 ) + 2(a11 a22 − a12 a21 )2
                           4AC − B2 =                                                                                > 0.
                                                                               2
                    Thus, by Theorem 9.6.4, V is positive definite.
                11. In this problem we show that the Liapunov function constructed in the preceding problem
                    is also a Liapunov function for the locally linear system (i). We must show that there is
                    some region containing the origin for which V̇ is negative definite.
                    (a) Show that
                                  V̇(x, y) = −(x2 + y2 ) + (2Ax + By)F1 (x, y) + (Bx + 2Cy)G1 (x, y).
                    (b) Recall that F1 (x, y)/r → 0 and G1 (x, y)/r → 0 as r = (x2 + y2 )1/2 → 0. This means
                    that, given any  > 0, there exists a circle r = R about the origin such that for 0 < r < R,
                    |F1 (x, y)| < r and |G1 (x, y)| < r. Letting M be the maximum of |2A|, |B|, and |2C|, show
                    by introducing polar coordinates that R can be chosen so that V̇(x, y) < 0 for r < R.
                    Hint: Choose  sufficiently small in terms of M.
                12. In this problem we prove a part of Theorem 9.3.2 related to instability.
                    (a) Show that if a11 + a22 > 0 and a11 a22 − a12 a21 > 0, then the critical point (0, 0) of the
                    linear system (ii) is unstable.
                    (b) The same result holds for the locally linear system (i). As in Problems 10 and 11,
                    construct a positive definite function V such that V̇(x, y) = x2 + y2 and hence is positive
                    definite, and then invoke Theorem 9.6.2.
9.7 Periodic Solutions and Limit Cycles
                In this section we discuss further the possible existence of periodic solutions of two-
                dimensional autonomous systems
                                                                 x = f(x).                                               (1)
                Such solutions satisfy the relation
                                                              x(t + T) = x(t)                                             (2)
                for all t and for some positive constant T called the period. The corresponding
                trajectories are closed curves in the phase plane. Periodic solutions often play an
                important role in physical problems because they represent phenomena that occur
                repeatedly. In many situations a periodic solution represents a “final state” that
                is approached by all “neighboring” solutions as the transients due to the initial
                conditions die out.
                   A special case of a periodic solution is a constant solution x = x0 ,which corresponds
                to a critical point of the autonomous system. Such a solution is clearly periodic
                with any period. In this section, when we speak of a periodic solution, we mean
                a nonconstant periodic solution. In this case the period T is usually chosen as the
                smallest positive number for which Eq. (2) is valid.
           Recall that the solutions of the linear autonomous system
                                                        x = Ax                                          (3)
        are periodic if and only if the eigenvalues of A are pure imaginary. In this case the
        critical point at the origin is a center, as discussed in Section 9.1. We emphasize
        that if the eigenvalues of A are pure imaginary, then every solution of the linear
        system (3) is periodic, while if the eigenvalues are not pure imaginary, then there
        are no (nonconstant) periodic solutions. The predator–prey equations discussed in
        Section 9.5, although nonlinear, behave similarly: all solutions in the first quadrant
        are periodic. The following example illustrates a different way in which periodic
        solutions of nonlinear autonomous systems can occur.
        Discuss the solutions of the system
EXAMPLE                                                                   
                                                        x + y − x(x2 + y2 )
   1                                         x
                                                 =                              .                        (4)
                                             y        −x + y − y(x2 + y2 )
           It is not difficult to show that (0, 0) is the only critical point of the system (4) and also that
        the system is locally linear in the neighborhood of the origin. The corresponding linear system
                                                                  
                                                x           1       1     x
                                                     =                                                   (5)
                                                y         −1        1     y
        has eigenvalues 1 ± i. Therefore, the origin is an unstable spiral point for both the linear
        system (5) and the nonlinear system (4). Thus any solution that starts near the origin in the
        phase plane will spiral away from the origin. Since there are no other critical points, we might
        think that all solutions of Eqs. (4) correspond to trajectories that spiral out to infinity. However,
        we now show that this is incorrect, because far away from the origin the trajectories are directed
        inward.
           It is convenient to introduce polar coordinates r and θ, where
                                              x = r cos θ,       y = r sin θ,                            (6)
        and r ≥ 0. If we multiply the first of Eqs. (4) by x, multiply the second by y, and add, we then
        obtain
                                         dx       dy
                                       x      +y      = (x2 + y2 ) − (x2 + y2 )2 .                       (7)
                                          dt      dt
        Since r 2 = x2 + y2 and r(dr/dt) = x(dx/dt) + y(dy/dt), it follows from Eq. (7) that
                                                     dr
                                                   r    = r 2 (1 − r 2 ).                                (8)
                                                     dt
        This equation is similar to the equations discussed in Section 2.5. The critical points (for r ≥ 0)
        are the origin and the point r = 1, which corresponds to the unit circle in the phase plane.
        From Eq. (8) it follows that dr/dt > 0 if r < 1 and dr/dt < 0 if r > 1. Thus, inside the unit
        circle the trajectories are directed outward, while outside the unit circle they are directed
        inward. Apparently, the circle r = 1 is a limiting trajectory for this system.
           To determine an equation for θ, we multiply the first of Eqs. (4) by y, multiply the second
        by x, and subtract, obtaining
                                                  dx      dy
                                                y     −x       = x 2 + y2 .                              (9)
                                                  dt       dt
Upon calculating dx/dt and dy/dt from Eqs. (6) and simplifying, we find that the left side of
Eq. (9) is −r 2 (dθ/dt), so Eq. (9) reduces to
                                               dθ
                                                   = −1.                                     (10)
                                               dt
   The system of equations (8), (10) for r and θ is equivalent to the original system (4). One
solution of the system (8), (10) is
                                       r = 1,       θ = −t + t0 ,                            (11)
where t0 is an arbitrary constant. As t increases, a point satisfying Eqs. (11) moves clockwise
around the unit circle. Thus the autonomous system (4) has a periodic solution. Other solutions
can be obtained by solving Eq. (8) by separation of variables; if r  = 0 and r  = 1, then
                                               dr
                                                       = dt.                                 (12)
                                           r(1 − r 2 )
Equation (12) can be solved by using partial fractions to rewrite the left side and then inte-
grating. By performing these calculations, we find that the solution of Eqs. (10) and (12) is
                                           1
                                 r=                ,     θ = −t + t0 ,                      (13)
                                        1 + c0 e−2t
where c0 and t0 are arbitrary constants. The solution (13) also contains the solution (11), which
is obtained by setting c0 = 0 in the first of Eqs. (13).
   The solution satisfying the initial conditions r = ρ, θ = α at t = 0 is given by
                                          1
                           r=                          ,     θ = −(t − α).                  (14)
                                  1 + [(1/ρ2 ) − 1]e−2t
If ρ < 1, then r → 1 from the inside as t → ∞; if ρ > 1, then r → 1 from the outside as t → ∞.
Thus in all cases, the trajectories spiral toward the circle r = 1 as t → ∞. Several trajectories
are shown in Figure 9.7.1.
                                                  y
                                                  1
                                    –1                            1         x
                                                 –1
        FIGURE 9.7.1 Trajectories of the system (4); the circle r = 1 is a limit cycle.
                 In this example, the circle r = 1 not only corresponds to periodic solutions of
              the system (4), but it also attracts other nonclosed trajectories that spiral toward it
              as t → ∞. In general, a closed trajectory in the phase plane such that other non-
              closed trajectories spiral toward it, from either the inside or the outside, as t → ∞,
              is called a limit cycle. Thus the circle r = 1 is a limit cycle for the system (4). If
              all trajectories that start near a closed trajectory (both inside and outside) spiral
              toward the closed trajectory as t → ∞, then the limit cycle is asymptotically stable.
              Since the limiting trajectory is itself a periodic orbit rather than an equilibrium point,
              this type of stability is often called orbital stability. If the trajectories on one side
              spiral toward the closed trajectory, while those on the other side spiral away as t → ∞,
              then the limit cycle is said to be semistable. If the trajectories on both sides of the
              closed trajectory spiral away as t → ∞, then the closed trajectory is unstable. It is
              also possible to have closed trajectories that other trajectories neither approach nor
              depart from—for example, the periodic solutions of the predator–prey equations in
              Section 9.5. In this case the closed trajectory is stable.
                 In Example 1 the existence of an asymptotically stable limit cycle was established
              by solving the equations explicitly. Unfortunately, this is usually not possible, so it
              is worthwhile to know general theorems concerning the existence or nonexistence
              of limit cycles of nonlinear autonomous systems. In discussing these theorems, it is
              convenient to rewrite the system (1) in the scalar form
                                         dx/dt = F(x, y),        dy/dt = G(x, y).                      (15)
Theorem 9.7.1 Let the functions F and G have continuous first partial derivatives in a domain D
              of the xy-plane. A closed trajectory of the system (15) must necessarily enclose at
              least one critical (equilibrium) point. If it encloses only one critical point, the critical
              point cannot be a saddle point.
                 Although we omit the proof of this theorem, it is easy to show examples of it.
              One is given by Example 1 and Figure 9.7.1, in which the closed trajectory encloses
              the critical point (0, 0), a spiral point. Another example is the system of predator–
              prey equations in Section 9.5; see Figure 9.5.2. Each closed trajectory surrounds the
              critical point (3, 2); in this case the critical point is a center.
                 Theorem 9.7.1 is also useful in a negative sense. If a given region contains no
              critical points, then there can be no closed trajectory lying entirely in the region. The
              same conclusion is true if the region contains only one critical point, and this point
              is a saddle point. For instance, in Example 2 of Section 9.4, which deals with two
              competing species, the only critical point in the interior of the first quadrant is the
              saddle point (0.5, 0.5). Therefore, this system has no closed trajectory lying in the first
              quadrant.
                 A second result about the nonexistence of closed trajectories is given in the
              following theorem.
Theorem 9.7.2 Let the functions F and G have continuous first partial derivatives in a simply
              connected domain D of the xy-plane. If Fx + Gy has the same sign throughout D,
              then there is no closed trajectory of the system (15) lying entirely in D.
                  A simply connected two-dimensional domain is one with no holes. Theorem 9.7.2
              is a straightforward consequence of Green’s theorem in the plane; see Problem 13.
              Note that if Fx + Gy changes sign in the domain, then no conclusion can be drawn;
              there may or may not be closed trajectories in D.
                  To illustrate Theorem 9.7.2, consider the system (4). A routine calculation
              shows that
                                     Fx (x, y) + Gy (x, y) = 2 − 4(x2 + y2 ) = 2(1 − 2r 2 ),                    (16)
                                                                                                      √
              where, as usual, r 2 = x2 + y2 . Hence Fx + Gy is positive for 0 ≤ r < 1/ 2, so there
              is no closed trajectory in this circular disk. Of course, we showed in Example 1 that
              there is no closed trajectory in the larger region r < 1. This illustrates that the infor-
              mation given by Theorem 9.7.2 may not be the            √ best possible result. Again referring
              to Eq. (16), note that Fx + Gy < 0 for r > 1/ 2. However, the theorem is not appli-
              cable in this case because this annular region is not simply connected. Indeed, as
              shown in Example 1, it does contain a limit cycle.
                  The following theorem gives conditions that guarantee the existence of a closed
              trajectory.
Theorem 9.7.3 (Poincaré–Bendixson11 Theorem)
              Let the functions F and G have continuous first partial derivatives in a domain D
              of the xy-plane. Let D1 be a bounded subdomain in D, and let R be the region that
              consists of D1 plus its boundary (all points of R are in D). Suppose that R contains
              no critical point of the system (15). If there exists a constant t0 such that x = φ(t),
              y = ψ(t) is a solution of the system (15) that exists and stays in R for all t ≥ t0 ,
              then either x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) is a periodic solution (closed trajectory), or x = φ(t),
              y = ψ(t) spirals toward a closed trajectory as t → ∞. In either case, the system (15)
              has a periodic solution in R.
                  Note that if R does contain a closed trajectory, then necessarily, by Theorem 9.7.1,
              this trajectory must enclose a critical point. However, this critical point cannot be in
              R. Thus R cannot be simply connected; it must have a hole.
                  As an application of the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem, consider again the system
              (4). Since the origin is a critical point, it must be excluded. For instance, we can
              consider the region R defined by 0.5 ≤ r ≤ 2. Next, we must show that there is a
              solution whose trajectory stays in R for all t greater than or equal to some t0 . This
              follows immediately from Eq. (8). For r = 0.5, dr/dt > 0, so r increases, while for
              r = 2, dr/dt < 0, so r decreases. Thus any trajectory that crosses the boundary of R
              is entering R. Consequently, any solution of Eqs. (4) that starts in R at t = t0 cannot
              leave but must stay in R for t > t0 . Of course, other numbers could be used instead
              of 0.5 and 2; all that is important is that r = 1 is included.
                  One should not infer from this discussion of the preceding theorems that it is
              easy to determine whether a given nonlinear autonomous system has periodic solu-
              tions; often it is not a simple matter at all. Theorems 9.7.1 and 9.7.2 are frequently
              inconclusive, and for Theorem 9.7.3 it is often difficult to determine a region R and
              a solution that always remains within it.
              11 Ivar Otto Bendixson (1861–1935) a Swedish mathematician, received his doctorate from Uppsala
              University and was professor and for many years rector of Stockholm University. This theorem improved
              on an earlier result of Poincaré and was published in a paper by Bendixson in Acta Mathematica in 1901.
            We close this section with another example of a nonlinear system that has a limit
        cycle.
        The van der Pol12 equation
EXAMPLE                                       u − μ(1 − u2 )u + u = 0,                              (17)
   2    where μ is a nonnegative constant, describes the current u in a triode oscillator. Discuss the
        solutions of this equation.
            If μ = 0, Eq. (17) reduces to u + u = 0, whose solutions are sine or cosine waves of period
        2π. For μ > 0, the second term on the left side of Eq. (17) must also be considered. This is the
        resistance term, proportional to u , with a coefficient −μ(1 − u2 ) that depends on u. For large
        u, this term is positive and acts as usual to reduce the amplitude of the response. However, for
        small u, the resistance term is negative and so causes the response to grow. This suggests that
        perhaps there is a solution of intermediate size that other solutions approach as t increases.
            To analyze Eq. (17) more carefully, we write it as a system of two equations by introducing
        the variables x = u, y = u . Then it follows that
                                         x = y,      y = −x + μ(1 − x2 )y.                           (18)
        The only critical point of the system (18) is the origin. Near the origin the corresponding linear
        system is                                               
                                                x         0      1     x
                                                    =                      ,                           (19)
                                                y       −1       μ     y
                                         
        whose eigenvalues are (μ ± μ2 − 4)/2. Thus the origin is an unstable spiral point for
        0 < μ < 2 and an unstable node for μ ≥ 2. In all cases, a solution that starts near the origin
        grows as t increases.
            With regard to periodic solutions, Theorems 9.7.1 and 9.7.2 provide only partial informa-
        tion. From Theorem 9.7.1 we conclude that if there are closed trajectories, they must enclose
        the origin. Next we calculate Fx (x, y) + Gy (x, y), with the result that
                                          Fx (x, y) + Gy (x, y) = μ(1 − x2 ).                          (20)
        Then it follows from Theorem 9.7.2 that closed trajectories, if there are any, are not contained
        in the strip |x| < 1 where Fx + Gy > 0.
            The application of the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem to this problem is not nearly as simple
        as for Example 1. If we introduce polar coordinates, we find that the equation for the radial
        variable r is
                                            r  = μ(1 − r 2 cos2 θ)r sin2 θ.                           (21)
            Again, consider an annular region R given by r1 ≤ r ≤ r2 , where r1 is small and r2 is large.
        When r = r1 , the linear term on the right side of Eq. (21) dominates, and r  > 0 except on
        the x-axis, where sin θ = 0 and consequently r  = 0 also. Thus trajectories are entering R at
        every point on the circle r = r1 , except possibly for those on the x-axis, where the trajecto-
        ries are tangent to the circle. When r = r2 , the cubic term on the right side of Eq. (21) is
        the dominant one. Thus r  < 0, except for points on the x-axis where r  = 0 and for points
        near the y-axis where r 2 cos2 θ < 1 and the linear term makes r  > 0. Thus, no matter how
        large a circle is chosen, there will be points on it (namely, the points on or near the y-axis)
        where trajectories are leaving R. Therefore, the Poincaré–Bendixson theorem is not applicable
        unless we consider more complicated regions.
        12 Balthasar van der Pol (1889–1959) was a Dutch physicist and electrical engineer who worked at the
        Philips Research Laboratory in Eindhoven. He was a pioneer in the experimental study of nonlinear
        phenomena and investigated the equation that bears his name in a paper published in 1926.
   It is possible to show, by a more intricate analysis, that the van der Pol equation does have a
unique limit cycle. However, we will not follow this line of argument further. We turn instead
to a different approach in which we plot numerically computed approximations to solutions.
Experimental observations indicate that the van der Pol equation has an asymptotically stable
periodic solution whose period and amplitude depend on the parameter μ. By looking at
graphs of trajectories in the phase plane and of u versus t, we can gain some understanding of
this periodic behavior.
   Figure 9.7.2 shows two trajectories of the van der Pol equation in the phase plane for
μ = 0.2. The trajectory starting near the origin spirals outward in the clockwise direction;
this is consistent with the behavior of the linear approximation near the origin. The other
trajectory passes through (−3, 2) and spirals inward, again in the clockwise direction.
Both trajectories approach a closed curve that corresponds to a stable periodic solution. In
Figure 9.7.3 we show the plots of u versus t for the solutions corresponding to the trajectories
in Figure 9.7.2. The solution that is initially smaller gradually increases in amplitude, while
the larger solution gradually decays. Both solutions approach a stable periodic motion that
corresponds to the limit cycle. Figure 9.7.3 also shows that there is a phase difference between
the two solutions as they approach the limit cycle. The plots of u versus t are nearly sinusoidal
in shape, consistent with the nearly circular limit cycle in this case.
                                                  y
                                                  2
                         (–3, 2)
                                                  1
                                   –2                               2           x
                                                 –1
                                                 –2
           FIGURE 9.7.2 Trajectories of the van der Pol equation (17) for μ = 0.2.
                u
                2
                1
                               10           20            30            40            50 t
               –1
               –2
              FIGURE 9.7.3      Plots of u versus t for the trajectories in Figure 9.7.2.
   Figures 9.7.4 and 9.7.5 show similar plots for the case μ = 1. Trajectories again move clock-
wise in the phase plane, but the limit cycle is considerably different from a circle. The plots
of u versus t tend more rapidly to the limiting oscillation, and again show a phase difference.
The oscillations are somewhat less symmetric in this case, rising somewhat more steeply than
they fall.
                                               y
                                             2
                                             1
                            –2        –1                  1         2          x
                                            –1
                                            –2
           FIGURE 9.7.4 Trajectories of the van der Pol equation (17) for μ = 1.
             u
              2
              1
                            10            20            30            40             50    t
            –1
            –2
            FIGURE 9.7.5       Plots of u versus t for the trajectories in Figure 9.7.4.
   Figure 9.7.6 shows the phase plane for μ = 5. The motion remains clockwise, and the limit
cycle is even more elongated, especially in the y direction. Figure 9.7.7 is a plot of u versus t.
Although the solution starts far from the limit cycle, the limiting oscillation is virtually reached
in a fraction of a period. Starting from one of its extreme values on the x-axis in the phase
plane, the solution moves toward the other extreme position slowly at first, but once a certain
point on the trajectory is reached, the remainder of the transition is completed very swiftly.
The process is then repeated in the opposite direction. The waveform of the limit cycle, as
shown in Figure 9.7.7, is quite different from a sine wave.
                                                y
                                               10
                                                5
                                  –2                           2          t
                                               –5
                                              –10
           FIGURE 9.7.6 Trajectories of the van der Pol equation (17) for μ = 5.
             u
             2
             1
                            10            20          30             40           50    t
            –1
            –2
    FIGURE 9.7.7      Plot of u versus t for the outward spiralling trajectory in Figure 9.7.6.
   These graphs clearly show that in the absence of external excitation, the van der Pol
oscillator has a certain characteristic mode of vibration for each value of μ. The graphs of
u versus t show that the amplitude of this oscillation changes very little with μ, but the period
increases as μ increases. At the same time, the waveform changes from one that is very nearly
sinusoidal to one that is much less smooth.
   The presence of a single periodic motion that attracts all (nearby) solutions—that is, an
asymptotically stable limit cycle—is one of the characteristic phenomena associated with
nonlinear differential equations.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, an autonomous system is expressed in polar coordinates.
         Determine all periodic solutions, all limit cycles, and the stability characteristics of all peri-
         odic solutions.
          1. dr/dt = r 2 (1 − r 2 ),       dθ/dt = 1            2. dr/dt = r(1 − r)2 ,        dθ/dt = −1
          3. dr/dt = r(r − 1)(r − 3),           dθ/dt = 1       4. dr/dt = r(1 − r)(r − 2),         dθ/dt = −1
          5. dr/dt = sin πr,          dθ/dt = 1
          6. dr/dt = r|r − 2|(r − 3),           dθ/dt = −1
          7. If x = r cos θ, y = r sin θ, show that y(dx/dt) − x(dy/dt) = −r 2 (dθ/dt).
          8. (a) Show that the system
                                       dx/dt = −y + xf (r)/r,        dy/dt = x + yf (r)/r
             has periodic solutions corresponding to the zeros of f (r). What is the direction of motion
             on the closed trajectories in the phase plane?
             (b) Let f (r) = r(r − 2)2 (r 2 − 4r + 3). Determine all periodic solutions, and determine
             their stability characteristics.
          9. Determine the periodic solutions, if any, of the system
                      dx                 x                         dy                y
                          =y+                 (x2 + y2 − 2),         = −x +               (x2 + y2 − 2).
                      dt              x 2 + y2                     dt              x2 + y2
         10. Using Theorem 9.7.2, show that the linear autonomous system
                                         dx/dt = a11 x + a12 y,     dy/dt = a21 x + a22 y
             does not have a periodic solution (other than x = 0, y = 0) if a11 + a22  = 0.
         In each of Problems 11 and 12, show that the given system has no periodic solutions other than
         constant solutions.
         11. dx/dt = x + y + x3 − y2 ,           dy/dt = −x + 2y + x2 y + y3 /3
         12. dx/dt = −2x − 3y − xy ,      2
                                                 dy/dt = y + x3 − x2 y
         13. Prove Theorem 9.7.2 by completing the following argument. According to Green’s the-
             orem in the plane, if C is a sufficiently smooth simple closed curve, and if F and G are
             continuous and have continuous first partial derivatives, then
                                                                 
                                                                                          
                                     F(x, y) dy − G(x, y) dx =          Fx (x, y) + Gy (x, y) dA,
                               C                                    R
             where C is traversed counterclockwise and R is the region enclosed by C. Assume that
             x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) is a solution of the system (15) that is periodic with period T. Let C be
             the closed curve given by x = φ(t), y = ψ(t) for 0 ≤ t ≤ T. Show that for this curve, the
             line integral is zero. Then show that the conclusion of Theorem 9.7.2 must follow.
         14. (a) By examining the graphs of u versus t in Figures 9.7.3, 9.7.5, and 9.7.7, estimate the
             period T of the van der Pol oscillator in these cases.
             (b) Calculate and plot the graphs of solutions of the van der Pol equation for other values
             of the parameter μ. Estimate the period T in these cases also.
             (c) Plot the estimated values of T versus μ. Describe how T depends on μ.
15. The equation
                                          u − μ(1 − 13 u2 )u + u = 0
     is often called the Rayleigh13 equation.
     (a) Write the Rayleigh equation as a system of two first order equations.
     (b) Show that the origin is the only critical point of this system. Determine its type and
     whether it is asymptotically stable, stable, or unstable.
     (c) Let μ = 1. Choose initial conditions, and compute the corresponding solution of
     the system on an interval such as 0 ≤ t ≤ 20 or longer. Plot u versus t, and also plot the
     trajectory in the phase plane. Observe that the trajectory approaches a closed curve (limit
     cycle). Estimate the amplitude A and the period T of the limit cycle.
     (d) Repeat part (c) for other values of μ, such as μ = 0.2, 0.5, 2, and 5. In each case
     estimate the amplitude A and the period T.
     (e) Describe how the limit cycle changes as μ increases. For example, make a table of
     values and/or plot A and T as functions of μ.
16. Consider the system of equations
                         x = μx + y − x(x2 + y2 ),        y = −x + μy − y(x2 + y2 ),                   (i)
     where μ is a parameter. Observe that this system is the same as the one in Example 1,
     except for the introduction of μ.
     (a) Show that the origin is the only critical point.
     (b) Find the linear system that approximates Eqs. (i) near the origin, and find its eigen-
     values. Determine the type and stability of the critical point at the origin. How does this
     classification depend on μ?
     (c) Referring to Example 1 if necessary, rewrite Eqs. (i) in polar coordinates.
                                                                           √
     (d) Show that when μ > 0, there is a periodic solution r = μ. By solving the system
     found in part (c), or by plotting numerically computed approximate solutions, conclude
     that this periodic solution attracts all other nonzero solutions.
     Note: As the parameter μ increases through the value zero, the previously asymptot-
     ically stable critical point at the origin loses its stability, and simultaneously a new
     asymptotically stable solution (the limit cycle) emerges. Thus the point μ = 0 is a
     bifurcation point; this type of bifurcation is called a Hopf 14 bifurcation.
17. Consider the van der Pol system
                                       x = y,    y = −x + μ(1 − x2 )y,
     where now we allow the parameter μ to be any real number.
     (a) Show that the origin is the only critical point. Determine its type, its stability property,
     and how these depend on μ.
13 John William Strutt (1842–1919), the third Lord Rayleigh, made notable contributions in several areas
of mathematical physics. His theory of scattering (1871) provided the first correct explanation of why
the sky is blue, and his two volume treatise The Theory of Sound, published in 1877 and 1878, is one of the
classics of applied mathematics. Apart from five years as Cavendish Professor of Physics at Cambridge,
he worked primarily in his private laboratory at home. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in
1904 for the discovery of argon.
14 Eberhard Hopf (1902–1983) was born in Austria and educated at the University of Berlin but spent
much of his life in the United States, mainly at Indiana University. He was one of the founders of ergodic
theory. Hopf bifurcations are named for him in honor of his rigorous treatment of them in a 1942 paper.
    (b) Let μ = −1; draw a phase portrait, and conclude that there is a periodic solution that
    surrounds the origin. Observe that this periodic solution is unstable. Compare your plot
    with Figure 9.7.4.
    (c) Draw a phase portrait for a few other negative values of μ. Describe how the shape
    of the periodic solution changes with μ.
    (d) Consider small positive or negative values of μ. By drawing phase portraits, determine
    how the periodic solution changes as μ → 0. Compare the behavior of the van der Pol
    system as μ increases through zero with the behavior of the system in Problem 16.
    Problems 18 and 19 extend the consideration of the Rosenzweig–MacArthur predator–
    prey model introduced in Problem 13 of Section 9.5.
18. Consider the system
                                                              
                                             2y                            x
                      x = x 2.4 − 0.2x −           ,  y = y −0.25 +             .
                                            x+6                          x+6
    Observe that this system differs from that in Problem 13 of Section 9.5 only in the growth
    rate for the prey.
    (a) Find all of the critical points.
    (b) Determine the type and stability of each critical point.
    (c) Draw a phase portrait in the first quadrant,and conclude that there is an asymptotically
    stable limit cycle. Thus this model predicts a stable long-term oscillation of the prey and
    predator populations.
19. Consider the system
                                                             
                                            2y                            x
                       x = x a − 0.2x −          ,   y = y −0.25 +            ,
                                           x+6                          x+6
    where a is a positive parameter. Observe that this system includes the one in Problem 18
    above and also the one in Problem 13 in Section 9.5.
    (a) Find all of the critical points.
    (b) Consider the critical point in the interior of the first quadrant. Find the eigenvalues of
    the approximate linear system. Determine the value a0 where this critical point changes
    from asymptotically stable to unstable.
    (c) Draw a phase portrait for a value of a slightly greater than a0 . Observe that a limit
    cycle has appeared. How does the limit cycle change as a increases further?
20. There are certain chemical reactions in which the constituent concentrations oscillate
    periodically over time. The system
                           x = 1 − (b + 1)x + x2 y/4,      y = bx − x2 y/4
    is a special case of a model, known as the Brusselator, of this kind of reaction. Assume
    that b is a positive parameter, and consider solutions in the first quadrant of the xy-plane.
    (a) Show that the only critical point is (1, 4b).
    (b) Find the eigenvalues of the approximate linear system at the critical point.
    (c) Classify the critical point as to type and stability. How does the classification depend
    on b?
    (d) As b increases through a certain value b0 , the critical point changes from asymptoti-
    cally stable to unstable. What is that value b0 ?
                    (e) Plot trajectories in the phase plane for values of b slightly less than and slightly greater
                    than b0 . Observe the limit cycle when b > b0 ; the Brusselator has a Hopf bifurcation point
                    at b0 .
                    (f) Plot trajectories for several values of b > b0 and observe how the limit cycle deforms
                    as b increases.
               21. The system
                                        x = 3(x + y − 13 x3 − k),     y = − 13 (x + 0.8y − 0.7)
                    is a special case of the Fitzhugh–Nagumo15 equations, which model the transmission of
                    neural impulses along an axon. The parameter k is the external stimulus.
                    (a) Show that the system has one critical point regardless of the value of k.
                    (b) Find the critical point for k = 0, and show that it is an asymptotically stable spiral
                    point. Repeat the analysis for k = 0.5, and show that the critical point is now an unstable
                    spiral point. Draw a phase portrait for the system in each case.
                    (c) Find the value k0 where the critical point changes from asymptotically stable to
                    unstable. Find the critical point and draw a phase portrait for the system for k = k0 .
                    (d) For k > k0 the system exhibits an asymptotically stable limit cycle; the system has a
                    Hopf bifurcation point at k0 . Draw a phase portrait for k = 0.4, 0.5, and 0.6; observe that
                    the limit cycle is not small when k is near k0 . Also plot x versus t and estimate the period
                    T in each case.
                    (e) As k increases further, there is a value k1 at which the critical point again becomes
                    asymptotically stable and the limit cycle vanishes. Find k1 .
9.8 Chaos and Strange Attractors: The Lorenz Equations
               In principle, the methods described in this chapter for second order autonomous sys-
               tems can be applied to higher order systems as well. In practice, several difficulties
               arise when we try to do this. One problem is that there is simply a greater num-
               ber of possible cases that can occur, and the number increases with the number of
               equations in the system (and the dimension of the phase space). Another problem is
               the difficulty of graphing trajectories accurately in a phase space of more than two
               dimensions; even in three dimensions it may not be easy to construct a clear and
               understandable plot of the trajectories, and it becomes more difficult as the number
               of variables increases. Finally—and this has been widely recognized only since the
               1970s—there are different and very complex phenomena that can occur, and fre-
               quently do occur, in systems of third and higher order that are not present in second
               order systems. Our goal in this section is to provide a brief introduction to some of
               these phenomena by discussing one particular three-dimensional autonomous sys-
               tem that has been intensively studied. In some respects, the presentation here is
               similar to the treatment of the logistic difference equation in Section 2.9.
               15 Richard Fitzhugh (1922–2007) of the United States Public Health Service and Jin-Ichi Nagumo (1926–
               1999) of the University of Tokyo independently proposed a simplification of the Hodgkin–Huxley model
               of neural transmission around 1961.
    An important problem in meteorology, and in other applications of fluid dynam-
ics, concerns the motion of a layer of fluid, such as the earth’s atmosphere, that is
warmer at the bottom than at the top; see Figure 9.8.1. If the vertical temperature
difference T is small, then there is a linear variation of temperature with altitude
but no significant motion of the fluid layer. However, if T is large enough, then the
warmer air rises, displacing the cooler air above it, and a steady convective motion
results. If the temperature difference increases further, then eventually the steady
convective flow breaks up and a more complex and turbulent motion ensues.
                                                                    Temperature
                                                                    difference ΔT
                                  Cooler
                                  Warmer
                        FIGURE 9.8.1 A layer of fluid heated from below.
    While investigating this phenomenon, Edward N. Lorenz16 was led (by a pro-
cess too involved to describe here) to the nonlinear autonomous three-dimensional
system
                                        dx/dt = σ(−x + y),
                                        dy/dt = rx − y − xz,                                         (1)
                                        dz/dt = −bz + xy.
Equations (1) are now commonly referred to as the Lorenz equations.17 Observe that
the second and third equations involve quadratic nonlinearities. However, except for
being a system of three equations, superficially the Lorenz equations appear no more
complicated than the competing species and predator–prey equations discussed in
Sections 9.4 and 9.5. The variable x in Eqs. (1) is related to the intensity of the
fluid motion, while the variables y and z are related to the temperature variations
in the horizontal and vertical directions. The Lorenz equations also involve three
parameters σ, r, and b, all of which are real and positive. The parameters σ and b
depend on the material and geometrical properties of the fluid layer. For the earth’s
atmosphere, reasonable values of these parameters are σ = 10 and b = 8/3; they
will be assigned these values in much of what follows in this section. The parameter r,
on the other hand, is proportional to the temperature difference T, and our purpose
is to investigate how the nature of the solutions of Eqs. (1) changes with r.
16 Edward N. Lorenz (1917–2008), an American meteorologist, received his Ph.D. from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in 1948 and was associated with that institution throughout his scientific career.
His first studies of the system (1) appeared in a famous 1963 paper (cited in the references) dealing with
the stability of fluid flows in the atmosphere.
17A very thorough treatment of the Lorenz equations appears in the book by Sparrow listed in the
references at the end of this chapter.
  Before proceeding further, we note that for an autonomous system of three first
order equations
            dx/dt = F(x, y, z),    dy/dt = G(x, y, z),    dz/dt = H(x, y, z),         (2)
the Jacobian matrix J is defined by
                                     ⎛                  ⎞
                                         Fx   Fy    Fz
                                     ⎜                  ⎟
                                J = ⎝ Gx      Gy    Gz ⎠ .                            (3)
                                        Hx    Hy    Hz
Thus, for the Lorenz equations (1), the Jacobian matrix is
                                   ⎛                     ⎞
                                       −σ       σ      0
                                   ⎜                     ⎟
                              J = ⎝ r − z −1 −x ⎠ .                                   (4)
                                         y       x −b
  The first step in analyzing the Lorenz equations is to locate the critical points by
solving the algebraic system
                                         σx − σy = 0,
                                     rx − y − xz = 0,                                 (5)
                                       −bz + xy = 0.
From the first equation we have y = x. Then, eliminating y from the second and
third equations, we obtain
                                    x(r − 1 − z) = 0,                                 (6)
                                        −bz + x = 0.
                                                2
                                                                                      (7)
One way to satisfy Eq. (6) is to choose x = 0. Then it follows that y = 0 and,
from Eq. (7), z = 0. Alternatively,
                              √       we can satisfy Eq. (6)√by choosing z = r − 1. Then
Eq. (7) requires that x = ± b(r − 1) and then y = ± b(r − 1) also. Observe that
these expressions for x and y are real only when r ≥ 1. Thus (0, 0, 0), which we will
denote by P1 , is a critical point for all values of r, and it is the only critical point
 √ r < 1. However,
for          √        when r > 1, there  √ are also two√ other critical points, namely,
( b(r − 1), b(r − 1), r − 1) and (− b(r − 1), − b(r − 1), r − 1). We will denote
the latter two points by P2 and P3 , respectively. Note that all three critical points
coincide when r = 1. As r increases through the value 1, the critical point P1 at the
origin bifurcates, and the critical points P2 and P3 come into existence.
  Next we will determine the local behavior of solutions in the neighborhood of
each critical point. Although much of the following analysis can be carried out for
arbitrary values of σ and b, we will simplify our work by using the values σ = 10 and
b = 8/3. Near the origin (the critical point P1 ), the approximating linear system is
                         ⎛ ⎞ ⎛                          ⎞⎛ ⎞
                           x         −10     10       0      x
                         ⎜ ⎟       ⎜                     ⎟⎜ ⎟
                         ⎝ ⎠ =⎝ r
                           y                 −1       0 ⎠ ⎝y⎠ .                       (8)
                           z             0    0    −8/3      z
The eigenvalues18 are determined from the equation
                                           
      −10 − λ          10            0     
                                           
                                           
           r        −1 − λ           0      = −(8/3 + λ)[λ2 + 11λ − 10(r − 1)] = 0.                (9)
                                           
           0            0      −8/3 − λ
Therefore,
                                          √                                    √
                 8               −11 −       81 + 40r                 −11 +      81 + 40r
         λ1 = − ,          λ2 =                        ,      λ3 =                          .       (10)
                 3                         2                                    2
Note that all three eigenvalues are negative for r < 1; for example, when r = 1/2,
the eigenvalues are λ1 = −8/3, λ2 = −10.52494, λ3 = −0.47506. Hence the origin is
asymptotically stable for this range of r both for the linear approximation (8) and
for the original system (1). However, λ3 changes sign when r = 1 and is positive for
r > 1. The value r = 1 corresponds to the initiation of convective flow in the physical
problem described earlier. The origin is unstable for r > 1; all solutions starting near
the origin tend to grow, except for those lying precisely in the plane determined
by the eigenvectors associated with λ1 and λ2 [or, for the nonlinear system (1), in a
certain surface tangent to this plane      at the origin].
    The second critical point is P2 ( 8(r − 1)/3, 8(r − 1)/3, r − 1) for r > 1. To con-
sider the neighborhood of this critical point, let u, v, and w be the perturbations from
the critical point in the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively. The approximating linear
system is
             ⎛ ⎞ ⎛                                                                ⎞⎛ ⎞
               u               −10                  10                     0             u
             ⎜ ⎟         ⎜                                                        ⎟⎜ ⎟
             ⎝v⎠ = ⎝              1                −1            − 8(r − 1)/3⎠ ⎝ v ⎠ .              (11)
                                              
               w             8(r − 1)/3          8(r − 1)/3            −8/3              w
The eigenvalues of the coefficient matrix of Eq. (11) are determined from the
equation
                           3λ3 + 41λ2 + 8(r + 10)λ + 160(r − 1) = 0,                                (12)
which is obtained by straightforward algebraic steps that are omitted here. The
solutions of Eq. (12) depend on r in the following way:
       For 1 < r < r1 ∼   = 1.3456 there are three negative real eigenvalues.
       For r1 < r < r2 =   ∼ 24.737 there are one negative real eigenvalue and two complex
       eigenvalues with negative real part.
       For r2 < r there are one negative real eigenvalue and two complex eigenvalues
       with positive real part.
    The same results are obtained for the critical point P3 . Thus there are several
different situations.
    For 0 < r < 1 the only critical point is P1 and it is asymptotically stable. All
solutions approach this point (the origin) as t → ∞.
18 Since r appears as a parameter in the Lorenz equations, we will use λ to denote the eigenvalues.
   For 1 < r < r1 the critical points P2 and P3 are asymptotically stable and P1 is
unstable. All nearby solutions approach one or the other of the points P2 and P3
exponentially.
   For r1 < r < r2 the critical points P2 and P3 are asymptotically stable and P1 is
unstable. All nearby solutions approach one or the other of the points P2 and P3 ;
most of them spiral inward to the critical point.
   For r2 < r all three critical points are unstable. Most solutions near P2 or P3 spiral
away from the critical point.
   However, this is by no means the end of the story. Let us consider solutions for r
somewhat greater than r2 . In this case P1 has one positive eigenvalue, and each of
P2 and P3 has a pair of complex eigenvalues with positive real part. A trajectory can
approach any one of the critical points only on certain highly restricted paths. The
slightest deviation from these paths causes the trajectory to depart from the critical
point. Since none of the critical points is stable,one might expect that most trajectories
would approach infinity for large t. However, it can be shown that all solutions remain
bounded as t → ∞; see Problem 5. In fact, it can be shown that all solutions ultimately
approach a certain limiting set of points that has zero volume. Indeed, this is true not
only for r > r2 but for all positive values of r.
   A plot of computed values of x versus t for a typical solution with r > r2 is shown
in Figure 9.8.2. Note that the solution oscillates back and forth between positive and
negative values in a rather erratic manner. Indeed, the graph of x versus t resem-
bles a random vibration, although the Lorenz equations are entirely deterministic
and the solution is completely determined by the initial conditions. Nevertheless,
the solution also exhibits a certain regularity in that the frequency and amplitude
of the oscillations are essentially constant in time.
                x
               16
                8
                                               10                        20   t
               –8
              –16
        FIGURE 9.8.2 A plot of x versus t for the Lorenz equations (1) with r = 28;
                                  the initial point is (5, 5, 5).
   The solutions of the Lorenz equations are also extremely sensitive to perturbations
in the initial conditions. Figure 9.8.3 shows the graphs of computed values of x versus
t for the two solutions whose initial points are (5, 5, 5) and (5.01, 5, 5). The dashed
graph is the same as the one in Figure 9.8.2, while the solid graph starts at a nearby
point. The two solutions remain close until t is near 10, after which they are quite
different and, indeed, seem to have no relation to each other. It was this property
that particularly attracted the attention of Lorenz in his original study of these
           x
         16
           8
                                                   10                                    20      t
         –8
        –16
FIGURE 9.8.3 Plots of x versus t for two initially nearby solutions of Lorenz equations with
  r = 28; the initial point is (5, 5, 5) for the dashed curve and is (5.01, 5, 5) for the solid curve.
equations, and it caused him to conclude that accurate detailed long-range weather
predictions are probably not possible.
   The attracting set in this case, although of zero volume, has a rather complicated
structure and is called a strange attractor. The term chaotic has come into general
use to describe solutions such as those shown in Figures 9.8.2 and 9.8.3.
   To determine how and when the strange attractor is created, it is illuminating to
investigate solutions for smaller values of r. For r = 21, solutions starting at three dif-
ferent initial points are shown in Figure 9.8.4. For the initial point (3, 8, 0) the solution
begins to converge to the point P3 almost at once; see Figure 9.8.4a. For the second
initial point (5, 5, 5) there is a fairly short interval of transient behavior, after which
the solution converges to P2 ; see Figure 9.8.4b. However, as shown in Figure 9.8.4c,
for the third initial point (5, 5, 10) there is a much longer interval of transient chaotic
behavior before the solution eventually converges to P2 . As r increases, the duration
of the chaotic transient behavior also increases. When r = r3 ∼                = 24.06, the chaotic
transients appear to continue indefinitely, and the strange attractor comes into being.
   We can also show the trajectories of the Lorenz equations in the three-
dimensional phase space, or at least projections of them in various planes. Figures
9.8.5 and 9.8.6 show projections in the xy- and xz-planes, respectively, of the tra-
jectory starting at (5, 5, 5). Observe that the graphs in these figures appear to cross
over themselves repeatedly, but this cannot be true for the actual trajectories in
three-dimensional space because of the general uniqueness theorem. The apparent
crossings are due wholly to the two-dimensional character of the figures.
   The sensitivity of solutions to perturbations of the initial data also has impli-
cations for numerical computations, such as those reported here. Different step
sizes, different numerical algorithms, and even the execution of the same algorithm
on different machines will introduce small differences in the computed solution,
which eventually lead to large deviations. For example, the exact sequence of pos-
itive and negative loops in the calculated solution depends strongly on the precise
numerical algorithm and its implementation, as well as on the initial conditions.
However, the general appearance of the solution and the structure of the attracting
set are independent of all these factors.
  x                                                x
 16                                             16
  8                                               8
        12                   24         t                                  12                     24        t
 –8                                             –8
–16                                            –16
         (a)                                                                    (b)
    x
   16
    8
                                                          48
      12               24                  36                                60               72            t
   –8
  –16
                                               (c)
       FIGURE 9.8.4 Plots of x versus t for three solutions of Lorenz equations with r = 21.
           (a) Initial point is (3, 8, 0). (b) Initial point is (5, 5, 5). (c) Initial point is (5, 5, 10).
                                                        y
                                                       20
                                                       10
                            –20                                                     20    x
                                                     –10
                                                     –20
                  FIGURE 9.8.5         Projections of a trajectory of the Lorenz equations
                                          (with r = 28) in the xy-plane.
                                                          z
                                                         40
                                                         30
                                                         10
                                 –10                                            10                     x
                       FIGURE 9.8.6       Projections of a trajectory of the Lorenz equations
                                            (with r = 28) in the xz-plane.
             Solutions of the Lorenz equations for other parameter ranges exhibit other
         interesting types of behavior. For example, for certain values of r greater than
         r2 , intermittent bursts of chaotic behavior separate long intervals of apparently
         steady periodic oscillation. For other ranges of r, solutions show the period-doubling
         property that we saw in Section 2.9 for the logistic difference equation. Some of these
         features are taken up in the problems.
             Since about 1975 the Lorenz equations and other higher-dimensional autonomous
         systems have been studied intensively, and this is one of the most active areas of cur-
         rent mathematical research. Chaotic behavior of solutions appears to be much more
         common than was suspected at first, and many questions remain unanswered. Some
         of these are mathematical in nature, while others relate to the physical applications
         or interpretations of solutions.
PROBLEMS Problems 1 through 3 ask you to fill in some of the details of the analysis of the Lorenz equations
         in this section.
           1. (a) Show that the eigenvalues of the linear system (8), valid near the origin, are given by
               Eq. (10).
               (b) Determine the corresponding eigenvectors.
               (c) Determine the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the system (8) in the case where r = 28.
          2. (a) Show that the linear approximation valid near the critical point P2 is given by Eq. (11).
               (b) Show that the eigenvalues of the system (11) satisfy Eq. (12).
               (c) For r = 28, solve Eq. (12) and thereby determine the eigenvalues of the system (11).
           3. (a) By solving Eq. (12) numerically, show that the real part of the complex roots changes
               sign when r ∼
                           = 24.737.
               (b) Show that a cubic polynomial x3 + Ax2 + Bx + C has one real zero and two pure
               imaginary zeros only if AB = C.
               (c) By applying the result of part (b) to Eq. (12), show that the real part of the complex
               roots changes sign when r = 470/19.
           4. Use the Liapunov function V(x, y, z) = x2 + σy2 + σz2 to show that the origin is a globally
               asymptotically stable critical point for the Lorenz equations (1) if r < 1.
  5. Consider the ellipsoid
                               V(x, y, z) = rx2 + σy2 + σ(z − 2r)2 = c > 0.
     (a) Calculate dV/dt along trajectories of the Lorenz equations (1).
     (b) Determine a sufficient condition on c so that every trajectory crossing V(x, y, z) = c
     is directed inward.
     (c) Evaluate the condition found in part (b) for the case σ = 10, b = 8/3, r = 28.
Problems 6 through 10 suggest some further investigations of the Lorenz equations.
  6. For r = 28, plot x versus t for the cases shown in Figures 9.8.2 and 9.8.3. Do your graphs
     agree with those shown in the figures? Recall the discussion of numerical computation in
     the text.
  7. For r = 28, plot the projections in the xy- and xz-planes, respectively, of the trajectory
     starting at the point (5, 5, 5). Do the graphs agree with those in Figures 9.8.5 and 9.8.6?
  8. (a) For r = 21, plot x versus t for the solutions starting at the initial points (3, 8, 0), (5, 5, 5),
     and (5, 5, 10). Use a t-interval of at least 0 ≤ t ≤ 30. Compare your graphs with those in
     Figure 9.8.4.
     (b) Repeat the calculation in part (a) for r = 22, r = 23, and r = 24. Increase the t interval
     as necessary so that you can determine when each solution begins to converge to one of
     the critical points. Record the approximate duration of the chaotic transient in each case.
     Describe how this quantity depends on the value of r.
     (c) Repeat the calculations in parts (a) and (b) for values of r slightly greater than 24.
     Try to estimate the value of r for which the duration of the chaotic transient approaches
     infinity.
  9. For certain r intervals, or windows, the Lorenz equations exhibit a period-doubling prop-
     erty similar to that of the logistic difference equation discussed in Section 2.9. Careful
     calculations may reveal this phenomenon.
     (a) One period-doubling window contains the value r = 100. Let r = 100 and plot the
     trajectory starting at (5, 5, 5) or some other initial point of your choice. Does the solution
     appear to be periodic? What is the period?
     (b) Repeat the calculation in part (a) for slightly smaller values of r. When r ∼    = 99.98, you
     may be able to observe that the period of the solution doubles. Try to observe this result
     by performing calculations with nearby values of r.
     (c) As r decreases further, the period of the solution doubles repeatedly. The next period
     doubling occurs at about r = 99.629. Try to observe this by plotting trajectories for nearby
     values of r.
10. Now consider values of r slightly larger than those in Problem 9.
     (a) Plot trajectories of the Lorenz equations for values of r between 100 and 100.78. You
     should observe a steady periodic solution for this range of r values.
     (b) Plot trajectories for values of r between 100.78 and 100.8. Determine as best you can
     how and when the periodic trajectory breaks up.
The Rössler19 System. The system
                          x = −y − z,     y = x + ay,   z = b + z(x − c),                            (i)
19 Otto E. Rössler (1940–   ), a German medical doctor and biochemist, was a student and later became
a faculty member at the University of Tübingen. The equations named for him first appeared in a paper
he published in 1976.
where a, b, and c are positive parameters, is known as the Rössler system.20 It is a relatively
simple system, consisting of two linear equations and a third equation with a single quadratic
nonlinearity. In Problems 11 through 15, we ask you to carry out some numerical investigations
of this system, with the goal of exploring its period-doubling property. To simplify matters, set
a = 0.25, set b = 0.5, and let c > 0 remain arbitrary.
                                                                 √
11. (a) √ Show that there are no critical points when c < √ 0.5, there is one critical point for
     c = 0.5, and there are two critical points when c > 0.5.
     (b) Find the critical
                        √ point(s) and determine the eigenvalues of the associated Jacobian
     matrix when c = 0.5 and when c = 1.
     (c) How do you think trajectories of the system will behave for c = 1? Plot the trajectory
     starting at the origin. Does it behave the way that you expected?
     (d) Choose one or two other initial points, and plot the corresponding trajectories. Do
     these plots agree with your expectations?
12. (a) Let c = 1.3. Find the critical points and the corresponding eigenvalues. What
     conclusions, if any, can you draw from this information?
     (b) Plot the trajectory starting at the origin. What is the limiting behavior of this trajec-
     tory? To see the limiting behavior clearly, you may wish to choose a t-interval for your
     plot so that the initial transients are eliminated.
     (c) Choose one or two other initial points, and plot the corresponding trajectories. Are
     the limiting behavior(s) the same as in part (b)?
     (d) Observe that there is a limit cycle whose basin of attraction is fairly large (although
     not all of xyz-space). Draw a plot of x, y, or z versus t, and estimate the period T1 of motion
     around the limit cycle.
13. The limit cycle found in Problem 12 comes into existence as a result of a Hopf bifurcation
     at a value c1 of c between 1 and 1.3. Determine, or at least estimate more precisely, the
     value of c1 . There are several ways in which you might do this.
     (a) Draw plots of trajectories for different values of c.
     (b) Calculate eigenvalues at critical points for different values of c.
     (c) Use the result of Problem 3(b) above.
14. (a) Let c = 3. Find the critical points and the corresponding eigenvalues.
     (b) Plot the trajectory starting at the point (1, 0, −2). Observe that the limit cycle now
     consists of two loops before it closes; it is often called a 2-cycle.
     (c) Plot x, y, or z versus t, and show that the period T2 of motion on the 2-cycle is very
     nearly double the period T1 of the simple limit cycle in Problem 12. There has been a
     period-doubling bifurcation of cycles for a certain value of c between 1.3 and 3.
15. (a) Let c = 3.8. Find the critical points and the corresponding eigenvalues.
     (b) Plot the trajectory starting at the point (1, 0, −2). Observe that the limit cycle is now a
     4-cycle. Find the period T4 of motion. Another period-doubling bifurcation has occurred
     for c between 3 and 3.8.
     (c) For c = 3.85, show that the limit cycle is an 8-cycle. Verify that its period is very close
     to eight times the period of the simple limit cycle in Problem 12.
     Note: As c increases further, there is an accelerating cascade of period-doubling bifurca-
     tions. The bifurcation values of c converge to a limit, which marks the onset of chaos.
20 See the book by Strogatz for a more extensive discussion and further references.
REFERENCES There are many books that expand on the material treated in this chapter. They include
           Drazin, P. G., Nonlinear Systems (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
           Glendinning, P., Stability, Instability, and Chaos (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).
           Grimshaw, R., Nonlinear Ordinary Differential Equations (Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1990;
              New York: CRC Press, 1991).
           Hirsch, M. W., Smale, S., and Devaney, R. L., Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems, and an Introduc-
              tion to Chaos (2nd edition) (San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2004).
           Hubbard, J. H., and West, B. H., Differential Equations: A Dynamical Systems Approach, Higher Dimen-
              sional Systems (New York/Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1995)
              Two books that are especially notable from the point of view of applications are
           Danby, J. M. A., Computer Applications to Differential Equations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
              1985).
           Strogatz, S. H., Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1994).
              A good reference on Liapunov’s second method is
           LaSalle, J., and Lefschetz, S., Stability by Liapunov’s Direct Method with Applications (New York:Academic
              Press, 1961).
              Among the large number of more comprehensive books on differential equations are
           Arnol’d, V. I., Ordinary Differential Equations (New York/Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992). Translation of
              the third Russian edition by Roger Cooke.
           Brauer, F., and Nohel, J., Qualitative Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations (New York: Benjamin,
              1969; New York: Dover, 1989).
           Guckenheimer, J. C., and Holmes, P., Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynamical Systems, and Bifurcations of Vec-
              tor Fields (New York/Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1983).
              A classic reference on ecology is
           Odum, E. P., and Barrett, G. W., Fundamentals of Ecology (5th ed.) (Belmont, CA:Thompson Brooks/Cole,
              2005).
              Three books dealing with ecology and population dynamics on a more mathematical level are
           Brauer, Fred and Castillo-Chávez, Carlos, Mathematical Models in Population Biology and Epidemiology
              (New York/Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2001).
           May, R. M., Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
              1973).
           Pielou, E. C., Mathematical Ecology (New York: Wiley, 1977).
              The original paper on the Lorenz equations is
           Lorenz, E. N., “Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow,” Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 20 (1963),
              pp. 130–141.
              A very detailed treatment of the Lorenz equations is
           Sparrow, C., The Lorenz Equations: Bifurcations, Chaos, and Strange Attractors (New York/Berlin:
              Springer-Verlag, 1982).
              An excellent nontechnical exposition of the early development of chaos may be found in
           Gleick, James, Chaos: Making a New Science (New York: Viking Penguin, 1987).
 CHAPTER
    10
               Partial
               Differential
               Equations and
               Fourier Series
               In many important physical problems there are two or more independent variables,
               so the corresponding mathematical models involve partial, rather than ordinary,
               differential equations. This chapter treats one important method for solving par-
               tial differential equations, a method known as separation of variables. Its essential
               feature is the replacement of the partial differential equation by a set of ordinary
               differential equations, which must be solved subject to given initial or boundary con-
               ditions. The first section of this chapter deals with some basic properties of boundary
               value problems for ordinary differential equations. The desired solution of the par-
               tial differential equation is expressed as a sum, usually an infinite series, formed from
               solutions of the ordinary differential equations. In many cases we ultimately need
               to deal with a series of sines and/or cosines, so part of the chapter is devoted to a
               discussion of such series, which are known as Fourier series. With the necessary math-
               ematical background in place, we then illustrate the use of separation of variables in
               a variety of problems arising from heat conduction, wave propagation, and potential
               theory.
10.1 Two-Point Boundary Value Problems
               Up to this point in the book we have dealt with initial value problems, consisting
               of a differential equation together with suitable initial conditions at a given point.
               A typical example, which was discussed at length in Chapter 3, is the differential
               equation
                                               y + p(t)y + q(t)y = g(t),                          (1)
                                                                                                    589
with the initial conditions
                                y(t0 ) = y0 ,   y (t0 ) = y0 .                        (2)
   Physical applications often lead to another type of problem, one in which the value
of the dependent variable y or its derivative is specified at two different points. Such
conditions are called boundary conditions to distinguish them from initial conditions
that specify the value of y and y at the same point. A differential equation and
suitable boundary conditions form a two-point boundary value problem. A typical
example is the differential equation
                                y + p(x)y + q(x)y = g(x)                             (3)
with the boundary conditions
                                 y(α) = y0 ,     y(β) = y1 .                            (4)
The natural occurrence of boundary value problems usually involves a space coordi-
nate as the independent variable, so we have used x rather than t in Eqs. (3) and (4).
To solve the boundary value problem (3), (4), we need to find a function y = φ(x) that
satisfies the differential equation (3) in the interval α < x < β and that takes on the
specified values y0 and y1 at the endpoints of the interval. Usually, we first seek
the general solution of the differential equation and then use the boundary conditions
to determine the values of the arbitrary constants.
   Boundary value problems can also be posed for nonlinear differential equations,
but we will restrict ourselves to a consideration of linear equations only. It is important
to determine whether a linear boundary value problem is homogeneous or nonho-
mogeneous. If the function g has the value zero for each x, and if the boundary values
y0 and y1 are also zero, then the problem (3), (4) is called homogeneous. Otherwise,
the problem is nonhomogeneous.
  Although the initial value problem (1), (2) and the boundary value problem (3),
(4) may superficially appear to be quite similar, they actually differ in some very
important ways. Under mild conditions on the coefficients, initial value problems are
certain to have a unique solution. On the other hand, boundary value problems under
similar conditions may have a unique solution, but they may also have no solution
or, in some cases, infinitely many solutions. In this respect, linear boundary value
problems resemble systems of linear algebraic equations.
   Let us recall some facts (see Section 7.3) about the system
                                          Ax = b,                                       (5)
where A is a given n × n matrix, b is a given n × 1 vector, and x is an n × 1 vector to
be determined. If A is nonsingular, then the system (5) has a unique solution for any
b. However, if A is singular, then the system (5) has no solution unless b satisfies a
certain additional condition, in which case the system has infinitely many solutions.
Now consider the corresponding homogeneous system
                                          Ax = 0,                                       (6)
obtained from the system (5) when b = 0. The homogeneous system (6) always has
the solution x = 0, which is often referred to as the trivial solution. If A is nonsingular,
then this is the only solution, but if A is singular, then there are infinitely many
nonzero, or nontrivial, solutions. Note that it is impossible for the homogeneous
        system to have no solution. These results can also be stated in the following way: the
        nonhomogeneous system (5) has a unique solution if and only if the homogeneous
        system (6) has only the solution x = 0, and the nonhomogeneous system (5) has
        either no solution or infinitely many solutions if and only if the homogeneous system
        (6) has nonzero solutions.
           We now turn to some examples of linear boundary value problems that illustrate
        very similar behavior. A more general discussion of linear boundary value problems
        appears in Chapter 11.
        Solve the boundary value problem
EXAMPLE
                                     y + 2y = 0,       y(0) = 1,     y(π) = 0.                    (7)
   1
           The general solution of the differential equation (7) is
                                                       √              √
                                            y = c1 cos 2 x + c2 sin 2 x.                            (8)
        The first boundary
                   √         condition
                                  √       requires that c1 =√1. The second boundary condition implies
        that c1 cos 2 π + c2 sin 2 π = 0, so c2 = − cot 2 π ∼       = −0.2762. Thus the solution of the
        boundary value problem (7) is
                                                  √           √          √
                                         y = cos 2 x − cot 2 π sin 2 x.                             (9)
        This example illustrates the case of a nonhomogeneous boundary value problem with a unique
        solution.
        Solve the boundary value problem
EXAMPLE
                                      y + y = 0,       y(0) = 1,    y(π) = a,                    (10)
   2
        where a is a given number.
           The general solution of this differential equation is
                                                y = c1 cos x + c2 sin x,                           (11)
        and from the first boundary condition we find that c1 = 1. The second boundary condition
        now requires that −c1 = a. These two conditions on c1 are incompatible if a = −1, so the
        problem has no solution in that case. However, if a = −1, then both boundary conditions are
        satisfied provided that c1 = 1, regardless of the value of c2 . In this case there are infinitely
        many solutions of the form
                                                 y = cos x + c2 sin x,                             (12)
        where c2 remains arbitrary. This example illustrates that a nonhomogeneous boundary value
        problem may have no solution—and also that under special circumstances it may have infinitely
        many solutions.
          The nonhomogeneous boundary value problem (3), (4) has a corresponding
        homogeneous problem consisting of the differential equation
                                             y + p(x)y + q(x)y = 0                              (13)
        and the boundary conditions
                                            y(α) = 0,        y(β) = 0.                              (14)
        Observe that this problem has the solution y = 0 for all x, regardless of the coeffi-
        cients p(x) and q(x). This (trivial) solution is rarely of interest. What we usually want
        to know is whether the problem has other, nonzero solutions. Consider the following
        two examples.
        Solve the boundary value problem
EXAMPLE
                                     y + 2y = 0,      y(0) = 0,    y(π) = 0.                       (15)
   3
           The general solution of the differential equation is again given by Eq. (8),
                                                     √              √
                                           y = c1 cos 2 x + c2 sin 2 x.
        The first
              √ boundary condition√ requires that c1 = 0, and the second boundary condition leads to
        c2 sin 2 π = 0. Since sin 2 π  = 0, it follows that c2 = 0 also. Consequently, y = 0 for all x is
        the only solution of the problem (15). This example illustrates that a homogeneous boundary
        value problem may have only the trivial solution y = 0.
        Solve the boundary value problem
EXAMPLE
                                      y + y = 0,     y(0) = 0,    y(π) = 0.                        (16)
   4
           The general solution is given by Eq. (11),
                                              y = c1 cos x + c2 sin x,
        and the first boundary condition requires that c1 = 0. Since sin π = 0, the second boundary
        condition is also satisfied when c1 = 0, regardless of the value of c2 . Thus the solution of
        the problem (16) is y = c2 sin x, where c2 remains arbitrary. This example illustrates that a
        homogeneous boundary value problem may have infinitely many solutions.
           Examples 1 through 4 illustrate (but of course do not prove) that there is the same
        relationship between homogeneous and nonhomogeneous linear boundary value
        problems as there is between homogeneous and nonhomogeneous linear algebraic
        systems. The nonhomogeneous boundary value problem (Example 1) has a unique
        solution, and the corresponding homogeneous problem (Example 3) has only the
        trivial solution. Further, the nonhomogeneous problem (Example 2) has either no
        solution or infinitely many, and the corresponding homogeneous problem (Example
        4) has nontrivial solutions.
        Eigenvalue Problems. Recall the matrix equation
                                                     Ax = λx                                        (17)
        that we discussed in Section 7.3. Equation (17) has the solution x = 0 for every value
        of λ, but for certain values of λ, called eigenvalues, there are also nonzero solutions,
        called eigenvectors. The situation is similar for boundary value problems.
   Consider the problem consisting of the differential equation
                                        y + λy = 0,                              (18)
together with the boundary conditions
                                  y(0) = 0,       y(π) = 0.                        (19)
Observe that the problem (18), (19) is the same as the problems in Examples 3
and 4 if λ = 2 and λ = 1, respectively. Recalling the results of these examples, we
note that for λ = 2, Eqs. (18), (19) have only the trivial solution y = 0, while for
λ = 1, the problem (18), (19) has other, nontrivial solutions. By extension of the
terminology associated with Eq. (17), the values of λ for which nontrivial solutions
of (18), (19) occur are called eigenvalues, and the nontrivial solutions themselves are
called eigenfunctions. Restating the results of Examples 3 and 4, we have found that
λ = 1 is an eigenvalue of the problem (18), (19) and that λ = 2 is not. Further, any
nonzero multiple of sin x is an eigenfunction corresponding to the eigenvalue λ = 1.
   Let us now turn to the problem of finding other eigenvalues and eigenfunctions
of the problem (18), (19). We need to consider separately the cases λ > 0, λ = 0, and
λ < 0, because the form of the solution of Eq. (18) is different in each of these cases.
λ > 0. To avoid the frequent appearance of radical signs, it is convenient in this case
to let λ = μ2 and to rewrite Eq. (18) as
                                       y + μ2 y = 0.                             (20)
The characteristic polynomial equation for Eq. (20) is r 2 + μ2 = 0 with roots
r = ±iμ, so the general solution is
                                y = c1 cos μx + c2 sin μx.                         (21)
Note that μ is nonzero (since λ > 0) and there is no loss of generality if we also
assume that μ is positive. The first boundary condition requires that c1 = 0, and then
the second boundary condition reduces to
                                       c2 sin μπ = 0.                              (22)
We are seeking nontrivial solutions, so we must require that c2  = 0. Consequently,
sin μπ must be zero, and our task is to choose μ so that this will occur. We know that
the sine function has the value zero at every integer multiple of π, so we can choose
μ to be any (positive) integer. The corresponding values of λ are the squares of the
positive integers, so we have determined that
                    λ1 = 1,  λ2 = 4,     λ3 = 9,    ...,   λn = n2 ,   ...         (23)
are eigenvalues of the problem (18), (19). The eigenfunctions are given by Eq. (21)
with c1 = 0, so they are just multiples of the functions sin nx for n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
Observe that the constant c2 in Eq. (21) is never determined, so eigenfunctions are
determined only up to an arbitrary multiplicative constant [just as are the eigenvec-
tors of the matrix problem (17)]. We will usually choose the multiplicative constant
to be 1 and write the eigenfunctions as
             y1 (x) = sin x,  y2 (x) = sin 2x,    ...,   yn (x) = sin nx,  ...,    (24)
remembering that multiples of these functions are also eigenfunctions.
λ < 0. In this case we let λ = −μ2 , so that Eq. (18) becomes
                                         y − μ2 y = 0.                              (25)
The characteristic equation for Eq. (25) is r 2 − μ2 = 0 with roots r = ±μ, so its
general solution can be written as
                                 y = c1 cosh μx + c2 sinh μx.                         (26)
We have chosen the hyperbolic functions cosh μx and sinh μx, rather than the
exponential functions exp(μx) and exp(−μx), as a fundamental set of solutions
for convenience in applying the boundary conditions. The first boundary condition
requires that c1 = 0; then the second boundary condition gives c2 sinh μπ = 0. Since
μ  = 0, it follows that sinh μπ  = 0, and therefore we must have c2 = 0. Consequently,
y = 0 and there are no nontrivial solutions for λ < 0. In other words, the problem
(18), (19) has no negative eigenvalues.
λ = 0. Now Eq. (18) becomes
                                             y = 0,                                 (27)
and its general solution is
                                          y = c1 x + c 2 .                            (28)
The boundary conditions (19) can be satisfied only by choosing c1 = 0 and c2 = 0,
so there is only the trivial solution y = 0 in this case as well. That is, λ = 0 is not an
eigenvalue.
   To summarize our results: we have shown that the problem (18), (19) has an
infinite sequence of positive eigenvalues λn = n2 for n = 1, 2, 3, . . . and that the cor-
responding eigenfunctions are proportional to sin nx. Further, there are no other real
eigenvalues.There remains the possibility that there might be some complex eigenval-
ues; recall that a matrix with real elements may very well have complex eigenvalues.
In Problem 23 we outline an argument showing that the particular problem (18), (19)
cannot have complex eigenvalues. Later, in Section 11.2, we discuss an important class
of boundary value problems that includes (18), (19). One of the useful properties of
this class of problems is that all their eigenvalues are real.
    In later sections of this chapter, we will often encounter the problem
                           y + λy = 0,       y(0) = 0,   y(L) = 0,                  (29)
which differs from the problem (18), (19) only in that the second boundary condition
is imposed at an arbitrary point x = L rather than at x = π. The solution process
for λ > 0 is exactly the same as before, up to the step where the second boundary
condition is applied. For the problem (29) this condition requires that
                                         c2 sin μL = 0                                (30)
rather than Eq. (22), as in the former case. Consequently, μL must be an integer
multiple of π, so μ = nπ/L, where n is a positive integer. Hence the eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of the problem (29) are given by
                λn = n2 π2 /L2 ,     yn (x) = sin(nπx/L),       n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .  (31)
         As usual, the eigenfunctions yn (x) are determined only up to an arbitrary multiplica-
         tive constant. In the same way as for the problem (18), (19), you can show that the
         problem (29) has no eigenvalues or eigenfunctions other than those in Eq. (31).
             The problems following this section explore to some extent the effect of differ-
         ent boundary conditions on the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. A more systematic
         discussion of two-point boundary and eigenvalue problems appears in Chapter 11.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 13, either solve the given boundary value problem or else show
         that it has no solution.
           1. y + y = 0, y(0) = 0, y (π) = 1                    2. y + 2y = 0, y (0) = 1, y (π) = 0
                
           3. y + y = 0, y(0) = 0, y(L) = 0                        4. y + y = 0,    y (0) = 1, y(L) = 0
                                                                     
           5. y + y = x, y(0) = 0, y(π) = 0                        6. y + 2y = x, y(0) = 0, y(π) = 0
           7. y + 4y = cos x, y(0) = 0, y(π) = 0                 8. y + 4y = sin x, y(0) = 0, y(π) = 0
                                                
           9. y + 4y = cos x, y (0) = 0, y (π) = 0               10. y + 3y = cos x, y (0) = 0, y (π) = 0
                2       
         11. x y − 2xy + 2y = 0, y(1) = −1, y(2) = 1
         12. x2 y + 3xy + y = x2 , y(1) = 0, y(e) = 0
         13. x2 y + 5xy + (4 + π2 )y = ln x, y(1) = 0, y(e) = 0
         In each of Problems 14 through 20, find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the given
         boundary value problem. Assume that all eigenvalues are real.
         14. y + λy = 0, y(0) = 0, y (π) = 0                  15. y + λy = 0, y (0) = 0, y(π) = 0
                                            
         16. y + λy = 0, y (0) = 0, y (π) = 0                    17. y + λy = 0, y (0) = 0, y(L) = 0
                                            
         18. y + λy = 0, y (0) = 0, y (L) = 0                    19. y − λy = 0, y(0) = 0, y (L) = 0
         20. x2 y − xy + λy = 0, y(1) = 0, y(L) = 0, L > 1
         21. The axially symmetric laminar flow of a viscous incompressible fluid through a long
              straight tube of circular cross section under a constant axial pressure gradient is known as
              Poiseuille1 flow. The axial velocity w is a function of the radial variable r only and satisfies
              the boundary value problem
                                   1         G
                            w + w = − ,            w(R) = 0,      w(r) bounded for 0 < r < R,
                                   r         μ
              where R is the radius of the tube, G is the pressure gradient, and μ is the coefficient of
              viscosity of the fluid.
              (a) Find the velocity profile w(r).
              (b) By integrating w(r) over a cross section, show that the total flow rate Q is given by
                                                         Q = πR4 G/8μ.
              Since Q, R, and G can be measured, this result provides a practical way to determine the
              viscosity μ.
              (c) Suppose that R is reduced to 3/4 of its original value. What is the corresponding
              reduction in Q? This result has implications for blood flow through arteries constricted by
              plaque.
         1 Jean Louis Marie Poiseuille (1797–1869) was a French physician who was also trained in mathematics
         and physics. He was particularly interested in the flow of blood and published his first paper on the subject
         in 1840.
               22. Consider a horizontal metal beam of length L subject to a vertical load f (x) per unit length.
                    The resulting vertical displacement in the beam y(x) satisfies the differential equation
                                                                   d4 y
                                                               EI       = f (x),
                                                                   dx4
                    where E is Young’s modulus and I is the moment of inertia of the cross section about
                    an axis through the centroid perpendicular to the xy-plane. Suppose that f (x)/EI is a
                    constant k. For each of the boundary conditions given below, solve for the displacement
                    y(x), and plot y versus x in the case that L = 1 and k = −1.
                    (a) Simply supported at both ends: y(0) = y (0) = y(L) = y (L) = 0
                    (b) Clamped at both ends: y(0) = y (0) = y(L) = y (L) = 0
                    (c) Clamped at x = 0, free at x = L: y(0) = y (0) = y (L) = y (L) = 0
               23. In this problem we outline a proof that the eigenvalues of the boundary value problem
                    (18), (19) are real.
                    (a) Write the solution of Eq. (18) as y = k1 exp(iμx) + k2 exp(−iμx), where λ = μ2 , and
                    impose the boundary conditions (19). Show that nontrivial solutions exist if and only if
                                                        exp(iμπ) − exp(−iμπ) = 0.                                    (i)
                    (b) Let μ = ν + iσ and use Euler’s relation exp(iνπ) = cos(νπ) + i sin(νπ) to determine
                    the real and imaginary parts of Eq. (i).
                    (c) By considering the equations found in part (b), show that ν is an integer and that
                    σ = 0. Consequently, μ is real and so is λ.
10.2 Fourier Series
               Later in this chapter you will find that you can solve many important problems involv-
               ing partial differential equations, provided that you can express a given function as
               an infinite sum of sines and/or cosines. In this and the following two sections we
               explain in detail how this can be done. These trigonometric series are called Fourier
               series2 ; they are somewhat analogous to Taylor series in that both types of series pro-
               vide a means of expressing quite complicated functions in terms of certain familiar
               elementary functions.
               2 Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1768–1830) was twice imprisoned during the French Revolution, later
               served as scientific advisor in Napoleon’s army in Egypt, and was prefect of the department of Isère
               (Grenoble) from 1801 to 1815. He made the first systematic use, although not a completely rigorous
               investigation, of trigonometric series in 1807 and 1811 in his papers on heat conduction. The papers were
               not published due to objections from the referees, principally Lagrange. Although it turned out that
               Fourier’s claim of generality was somewhat too strong, his results inspired a flood of important research
               that has continued to the present day. See Grattan-Guinness or Carslaw (Historical Introduction) for a
               detailed history of Fourier series.
  We begin with a series of the form
                                  ∞
                           a0                mπx          mπx
                              +       am cos      + bm sin        .                    (1)
                           2                    L            L
                                 m=1
On the set of points where the series (1) converges, it defines a function f , whose
value at each point is the sum of the series for that value of x. In this case the series
(1) is said to be the Fourier series for f . Our immediate goals are to determine what
functions can be represented as a sum of a Fourier series and to find some means
of computing the coefficients in the series corresponding to a given function. The
first term in the series (1) is written as a0 /2 rather than as a0 to simplify a formula
for the coefficients that we derive below. Besides their association with the method
of separation of variables and partial differential equations, Fourier series are also
useful in various other ways, such as in the analysis of mechanical or electrical systems
acted on by periodic external forces.
Periodicity of the Sine and Cosine Functions. To discuss Fourier series, it is necessary
to develop certain properties of the trigonometric functions sin(mπx/L) and
cos(mπx/L), where m is a positive integer. The first property is their periodic charac-
ter. A function f is said to be periodic with period T > 0 if the domain of f contains
x + T whenever it contains x, and if
                                       f (x + T) = f (x)                               (2)
for every value of x. An example of a periodic function is shown in Figure 10.2.1. It
follows immediately from the definition that if T is a period of f , then 2T is also a
period, and so indeed is any integral multiple of T. The smallest value of T for which
Eq. (2) holds is called the fundamental period of f . A constant function is a periodic
function with an arbitrary period but no fundamental period.
                                               y
                                                                           x
                                            T
                                                   2T
                       FIGURE 10.2.1 A periodic function of period T.
  If f and g are any two periodic functions with common period T, then any linear
combination c1 f + c2 g is also periodic with period T. To prove this statement, let
F(x) = c1 f (x) + c2 g(x); then, for any x,
             F(x + T) = c1 f (x + T) + c2 g(x + T) = c1 f (x) + c2 g(x) = F(x).        (3)
Moreover, it can be shown that the sum of any finite number, or even the sum of a
convergent infinite series, of functions of period T is also periodic with period T. In
a similar way, you can show that the product fg is periodic with period T.
   In particular, the functions sin(mπx/L) and cos(mπx/L), m = 1, 2, 3, . . . , are peri-
odic with fundamental period T = 2L/m. To see this, recall that sin x and cos x have
fundamental period 2π and that sin αx and cos αx have fundamental period 2π/α. If
we choose α = mπ/L, then the period T of sin(mπx/L) and cos(mπx/L) is given by
T = 2πL/mπ = 2L/m.
   Note also that, since every positive integral multiple of a period is also a period,
each of the functions sin(mπx/L) and cos(mπx/L) has the common period 2L.
Orthogonality of the Sine and Cosine Functions. To describe a second essential property of
the functions sin(mπx/L) and cos(mπx/L), we generalize the concept of orthogonal-
ity of vectors (see Section 7.2). The standard inner product (u, v) of two real-valued
functions u and v on the interval α ≤ x ≤ β is defined by
                                               β
                                   (u, v) =       u(x)v(x) dx.                              (4)
                                               α
The functions u and v are said to be orthogonal on α ≤ x ≤ β if their inner product
is zero—that is, if
                                      β
                                           u(x)v(x) dx = 0.                                 (5)
                                       α
A set of functions is said to be mutually orthogonal if each distinct pair of functions
in the set is orthogonal.
   The functions sin(mπx/L) and cos(mπx/L), m = 1, 2, . . . form a mutually orthog-
onal set of functions on the interval −L ≤ x ≤ L. In fact, they satisfy the following
orthogonality relations:
                         L                             
                                  mπx        nπx          0, m  = n,
                             cos        cos        dx =                                     (6)
                         −L        L           L          L, m = n;
                         L
                                  mπx        nπx
                             cos         sin       dx = 0,     all m, n;                    (7)
                          −L        L          L
                          L                            
                                  mπx        nπx          0,   m  = n,
                              sin        sin       dx =                                     (8)
                          −L        L          L          L,   m = n.
   These results can be obtained by direct integration. For example, to derive Eq. (8),
note that
     L                                                                      
             mπx       nπx         1 L            (m − n)πx          (m + n)πx
         sin       sin      dx =             cos             − cos               dx
     −L        L        L          2 −L               L                  L
                                                                                    L
                                   1L      sin[(m − n)πx/L] sin[(m + n)πx/L]           
                                =                              −                       
                                   2π             m−n                    m+n           
                                                                                         −L
                                =0
as long as m + n and m − n are not zero. Since m and n are positive, m + n = 0. On
the other hand, if m − n = 0, then m = n, and the integral must be evaluated in a
different way. In this case
                      L                                L
                                mπx         nπx                   mπx 2
                           sin         sin       dx =         sin            dx
                       −L         L           L         −L           L
                                                          L                       
                                                       1                   2mπx
                                                    =           1 − cos                  dx
                                                       2  −L                  L
                                                                                   L
                                                       1         sin(2mπx/L) 
                                                    =      x−                           
                                                       2             2mπ/L              
                                                                                         −L
                                                    = L.
This establishes Eq. (8); Eqs. (6) and (7) can be verified by similar computations.
The Euler–Fourier Formulas. Now let us suppose that a series of the form (1) converges,
and let us call its sum f (x):
                                             ∞
                                    a0                  mπx                mπx
                          f (x) =        +       am cos         + bm sin              .                  (9)
                                     2                    L                   L
                                            m=1
The coefficients am and bm can be related to f (x) as a consequence of the orthogonality
conditions (6), (7), and (8). First multiply Eq. (9) by cos(nπx/L), where n is a fixed
positive integer (n > 0), and integrate with respect to x from −L to L. Assuming that
the integration can be legitimately carried out term by term,3 we obtain
       L                                                     ∞        L
                        nπx           a0 L         nπx                             mπx          nπx
            f (x) cos         dx =             cos      dx +        am       cos            cos     dx
        −L               L             2    −L      L                     −L          L          L
                                                               m=1
                                         ∞       L
                                                         mπx         nπx
                                     +        bm     sin        cos         dx.                         (10)
                                                  −L       L           L
                                         m=1
Keeping in mind that n is fixed whereas m ranges over the positive integers, it follows
from the orthogonality relations (6) and (7) that the only nonzero term on the right
side of Eq. (10) is the one for which m = n in the first summation. Hence
                            L
                                             nπx
                                 f (x) cos       dx = Lan ,         n = 1, 2, . . . .                   (11)
                             −L               L
To determine a0 , we can integrate Eq. (9) from −L to L, obtaining
       L                                  ∞      L                     ∞         L
                          a0 L                              mπx                                 mπx
            f (x) dx =              dx +        am     cos          dx +       bm           sin      dx
        −L                 2    −L                  −L        L                         −L       L
                                            m=1                            m=1
                       = La0 ,                                                                          (12)
3This is a nontrivial assumption, because not all convergent series with variable terms can be so integrated.
For the special case of Fourier series, however, term-by-term integration can always be justified.
        since each integral involving a trigonometric function is zero. Thus
                                       
                                     1 L                nπx
                              an =          f (x) cos        dx,       n = 0, 1, 2, . . . .        (13)
                                    L −L                 L
        By writing the constant term in Eq. (9) as a0 /2, it is possible to compute all the an
        from Eq. (13). Otherwise, a separate formula would have to be used for a0 .
           A similar expression for bn may be obtained by multiplying Eq. (9) by sin(nπx/L),
        integrating termwise from −L to L, and using the orthogonality relations (7) and (8);
        thus
                                       
                                     1 L               nπx
                              bn =           f (x) sin       dx,       n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .        (14)
                                     L −L                L
        Equations (13) and (14) are known as the Euler–Fourier formulas for the coefficients
        in a Fourier series. Hence, if the series (9) converges to f (x), and if the series can be
        integrated term by term, then the coefficients must be given by Eqs. (13) and (14).
           Note that Eqs. (13) and (14) are explicit formulas for an and bn in terms of f , and
        that the determination of any particular coefficient is independent of all the other
        coefficients. Of course, the difficulty in evaluating the integrals in Eqs. (13) and (14)
        depends very much on the particular function f involved.
           Note also that the formulas (13) and (14) depend only on the values of f (x) in the
        interval −L ≤ x ≤ L. Since each of the terms in the Fourier series (9) is periodic with
        period 2L, the series converges for all x whenever it converges in −L ≤ x ≤ L, and
        its sum is also a periodic function with period 2L. Hence f (x) is determined for all x
        by its values in the interval −L ≤ x ≤ L.
           It is possible to show (see Problem 27) that if g is periodic with period T, then every
        integral of g over an interval of length T has the same value. If we apply this result to
        the Euler–Fourier formulas (13) and (14), it follows that the interval of integration,
        −L ≤ x ≤ L, can be replaced, if it is more convenient to do so, by any other interval
        of length 2L.
        Assume that there is a Fourier series converging to the function f defined by
EXAMPLE                                            
                                                      −x, −2 ≤ x < 0,
   1                                      f (x) =
                                                       x,     0 ≤ x < 2;
                                                                                                    (15)
                                                   f (x + 4) = f (x).
        Determine the coefficients in this Fourier series.
           This function represents a triangular wave (see Figure 10.2.2) and is periodic with period 4.
        Thus in this case L = 2, and the Fourier series has the form
                                         a0 
                                                 ∞
                                                             mπx             mπx
                                 f (x) =     +        am cos        + bm sin        ,               (16)
                                         2      m=1
                                                               2              2
        where the coefficients are computed from Eqs. (13) and (14) with L = 2. Substituting for f (x)
        in Eq. (13) with m = 0, we have
                                                            
                                        1 0                1 2
                                  a0 =         (−x) dx +         x dx = 1 + 1 = 2.                  (17)
                                        2 −2               2 0
                                                          y
                                                          2
                –6           –4            –2                            2            4         6 x
                       FIGURE 10.2.2 The triangular wave in Example 1.
  For m > 0, Eq. (13) yields
                                  0                                  2
                               1                    mπx            1               mπx
                        am =          (−x) cos              dx +           x cos        dx.
                               2   −2                  2           2   0             2
These integrals can be evaluated through integration by parts, with the result that
                                                                          0
                   1        2         mπx              2    2
                                                                   mπx       
             am =       −      x sin          −                cos           
                   2       mπ            2           mπ              2       
                                                                             
                                                                               −2
                                                                           2
                       1    2          mπx             2     2
                                                                    mπx       
                   +           x sin           +               cos            
                       2   mπ            2            mπ              2       
                                                                              
                                                                               0
                                                                                                
                                    2                2                         2                  2
                   1          2              2                          2                     2
                =       −             +                cos mπ +                  cos mπ −
                   2         mπ             mπ                        mπ                    mπ
                       4
                =          (cos mπ − 1),               m = 1, 2, . . .
                   (mπ)2
                   
                     −8/(mπ)2 ,        m odd,
                =                                                                                     (18)
                        0,             m even.
Finally, from Eq. (14) it follows in a similar way that
                                       bm = 0,             m = 1, 2, . . . .                          (19)
By substituting the coefficients from Eqs. (17), (18), and (19) in the series (16), we obtain the
Fourier series for f :
                                      
                                  8          πx         1       3πx        1        5πx
                  f (x) = 1 −           cos         + 2 cos           + 2 cos           + ···
                                 π2            2        3         2       5          2
                                  8      ∞
                                                  cos(mπx/2)
                         =1−
                                 π2                      m2
                                      m=1,3,5,...
                                  8  cos(2n − 1)πx/2
                                       ∞
                         =1−                                       .                                  (20)
                                 π2 n=1           (2n − 1)2
        Let
EXAMPLE                                                ⎧
                                                       ⎪
                                                       ⎨0,    −3 < x < −1,
   2                                          f (x) = 1,      −1 < x < 1,                                         (21)
                                                       ⎪
                                                       ⎩0,      1<x<3
        and suppose that f (x + 6) = f (x); see Figure 10.2.3. Find the coefficients in the Fourier
        series for f .
                                                            y
                                                            1
                            –7      –5          –3      –1        1          3        5        7             t
                                  FIGURE 10.2.3           Graph of f (x) in Example 2.
           Note that f (x) is not assigned a value at the points of discontinuity, such as x = −1 and
        x = 1. This has no effect on the values of the Fourier coefficients, because they result from the
        evaluation of integrals, and the value of an integral is not affected by the value of the integrand
        at a single point or at a finite number of points. Thus the coefficients are the same regardless
        of what value, if any, f (x) is assigned at a point of discontinuity.
           Since f has period 6, it follows that L = 3 in this problem. Consequently, the Fourier series
        for f has the form
                                               a0 
                                                      ∞
                                                                    nπx               nπx
                                   f (x) =         +       an cos         + bn sin           ,                    (22)
                                                2    n=1
                                                                      3                3
        where the coefficients an and bn are given by Eqs. (13) and (14) with L = 3. We have
                                                    3                   1
                                                 1                   1                 2
                                         a0 =          f (x) dx =            1 dx =      .                        (23)
                                                 3  −3               3   −1            3
        Similarly,
                                                                  1
                              1                                  
                           1          nπx            1       nπx           2       nπ
                     an =        cos        dx =        sin        = nπ sin 3 ,               n = 1, 2, . . . ,  (24)
                           3  −1        3           nπ        3   
                                                                    −1
        and
                                                                          1
                                  1                                      
                               1           nπx              1       nπx 
                         bn =         sin         dx = −      cos               = 0,       n = 1, 2, . . . .      (25)
                               3  −1         3             nπ         3 
                                                                            −1
        Thus the Fourier series for f is
                        1  2
                             ∞
                                          nπ        nπx
               f (x) =    +          sin       cos
                        3 n=1 nπ           3         3
                             √                                                                                 
                        1      3                    cos(2πx/3) cos(4πx/3) cos(5πx/3)
                     =    +       cos(πx/3) +                     −                   −                  + ··· .  (26)
                        3    π                            2                   4                5
        Consider again the function in Example 1 and its Fourier series (20). Investigate the speed
EXAMPLE with which the series converges. In particular, determine how many terms are needed so that
   3    the error is no greater than 0.01 for all x.
           The mth partial sum in this series
                                                        8  cos(2n − 1)πx/2
                                                             m
                                        sm (x) = 1 −                                                     (27)
                                                       π2 n=1       (2n − 1)2
        can be used to approximate the function f . The coefficients diminish as (2n − 1)−2 , so the series
        converges fairly rapidly. This is borne out by Figure 10.2.4, where the partial sums for m = 1
        and m = 2 are plotted. To investigate the convergence in more detail, we can consider the error
        em (x) = f (x) − sm (x). Figure 10.2.5 shows a plot of |e6 (x)| versus x for 0 ≤ x ≤ 2. Observe that
        |e6 (x)| is greatest at the points x = 0 and x = 2, where the graph of f (x) has corners. It is more
        difficult for the series to approximate the function near these points, resulting in a larger error
        there for a given m. Similar graphs are obtained for other values of m.
                                                           y
                                                                              m=2
                                                           2
                                                                         m=1
                               –4            –2                            2             4     x
             FIGURE 10.2.4        Partial sums in the Fourier series, Eq. (20), for the triangular wave.
                         e6(x)
                         0.035
                         0.030
                         0.025
                         0.020
                         0.015
                         0.010
                         0.005
                                            0.5             1            1.5           2       x
                         FIGURE 10.2.5        Plot of |e6 (x)| versus x for the triangular wave.
            Once you realize that the maximum error always occurs at x = 0 or x = 2, you can obtain
        a uniform error bound for each m simply by evaluating |em (x)| at one of these points. For
        example, for m = 6 we have e6 (2) = 0.03370, so |e6 (x)| < 0.034 for 0 ≤ x ≤ 2 and consequently
for all x. Table 10.2.1 shows corresponding data for other values of m; these data are plotted
in Figure 10.2.6. From this information you can begin to estimate the number of terms that
are needed in the series in order to achieve a given level of accuracy in the approximation.
For example, to guarantee that |em (x)| ≤ 0.01, we need to choose m = 21, for which the error
is e21 (2) = 0.00965.
                               TABLE 10.2.1 Values of the
                               Error em (2) for the Triangular
                               Wave
                                  m                      em (2)
                                   2                    0.09937
                                   4                    0.05040
                                   6                    0.03370
                                  10                    0.02025
                                  15                    0.01350
                                  20                    0.01013
                                  25                    0.00810
                em(2)
                 0.10
                 0.08
                 0.06
                 0.04
                 0.02
                               5         10         15        20        25      m
                 FIGURE 10.2.6    Plot of em (2) versus m for the triangular wave.
   In this book, Fourier series appear mainly as a means of solving certain problems in
partial differential equations. However, such series have much wider application
in science and engineering and, in general, are valuable tools in the investigation of
periodic phenomena. A basic problem is to resolve an incoming signal into its har-
monic components, which amounts to constructing its Fourier series representation.
In some frequency ranges, the separate terms correspond to different colors or to
different audible tones. The magnitude of the coefficient determines the amplitude
of each component. This process is referred to as spectral analysis.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 8, determine whether the given function is periodic. If so, find
         its fundamental period.
           1. sin 5x           2. cos 2πx         3. sinh 2x          4. sin πx/L       5. tan πx       6. x2
                       
                         0, 2n − 1 ≤ x < 2n,
           7. f (x) =                                      n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .
                         1, 2n ≤ x < 2n + 1;
                       
                         (−1)n , 2n − 1 ≤ x < 2n,
           8. f (x) =                                            n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .
                         1,          2n ≤ x < 2n + 1;
           9. If f (x) = −x for −L < x < L, and if f (x + 2L) = f (x), find a formula for f (x) in the interval
              L < x < 2L; in the interval −3L < x < −2L.
                          
                             x + 1, −1 < x < 0,
         10. If f (x) =                                 and if f (x + 2) = f (x), find a formula for f (x) in the
                             x,          0 < x < 1,
              interval 1 < x < 2; in the interval 8 < x < 9.
         11. If f (x) = L − x for 0 < x < 2L, and if f (x + 2L) = f (x), find a formula for f (x) in the
              interval −L < x < 0.
         12. Verify Eqs. (6) and (7) in this section by direct integration.
         In each of Problems 13 through 18:
         (a) Sketch the graph of the given function for three periods.
         (b) Find the Fourier series for the given function.
         13. f (x) = −x, −L ≤ x < L;                   f (x + 2L) = f (x)
                       
                         1, −L ≤ x < 0,
         14. f (x) =                                 f (x + 2L) = f (x)
                         0,       0 ≤ x < L;
                       
                         x, −π ≤ x < 0,
         15. f (x) =                                 f (x + 2π) = f (x)
                         0,       0 ≤ x < π;
                       
                         x + 1, −1 ≤ x < 0,
         16. f (x) =                                      f (x + 2) = f (x)
                         1 − x,       0 ≤ x < 1;
                       
                         x + L, −L ≤ x ≤ 0,
         17. f (x) =                                        f (x + 2L) = f (x)
                         L,            0 < x < L;
                       ⎧
                       ⎪
                       ⎨0, −2 ≤ x ≤ −1,
         18. f (x) = x, −1 < x < 1,                    f (x + 4) = f (x)
                       ⎪
                       ⎩0,        1 ≤ x < 2;
         In each of Problems 19 through 24:
         (a) Sketch the graph of the given function for three periods.
         (b) Find the Fourier series for the given function.
         (c) Plot the partial sum sm (x) versus x for m = 5, 10, and 20.
         (d) Describe how the Fourier series seems to be converging.
                       
                         −1, −2 ≤ x < 0,
         19. f (x) =                                   f (x + 4) = f (x)
                            1,      0 ≤ x < 2;
         20. f (x) = x,      −1 ≤ x < 1;        f (x + 2) = f (x)
21. f (x) = x2 /2, −2 ≤ x ≤ 2;           f (x + 4) = f (x)
            
              x + 2,      −2 ≤ x < 0,
22. f (x) =                                     f (x + 4) = f (x)
              2 − 2x,      0 ≤ x < 2;
            
              − 21 x,       −2 ≤ x < 0,
23. f (x) =                                        f (x + 4) = f (x)
              2x − 2 x ,
                      1 2
                               0 ≤ x < 2;
            
              0,            −3 ≤ x ≤ 0,
24. f (x) = 2                                       f (x + 6) = f (x)
              x (3 − x),       0 < x < 3;
25. Consider the function f defined in Problem 21, and let em (x) = f (x) − sm (x).
    (a) Plot |em (x)| versus x for 0 ≤ x ≤ 2 for several values of m.
    (b) Find the smallest value of m for which |em (x)| ≤ 0.01 for all x.
26. Consider the function f defined in Problem 24, and let em (x) = f (x) − sm (x).
    (a) Plot |em (x)| versus x for 0 ≤ x ≤ 3 for several values of m.
    (b) Find the smallest value of m for which |em (x)| ≤ 0.1 for all x.
27. Suppose that g is an integrable periodic function with period T.
    (a) If 0 ≤ a ≤ T, show that
                                        T                 a+T
                                             g(x) dx =             g(x) dx.
                                         0                  a
                            a              a+T
    Hint: Show first that g(x) dx =                g(x) dx. In the second integral, consider the change
                             0               T
    of variable s = x − T.
    (b) Show that for any value of a, not necessarily in 0 ≤ a ≤ T,
                                        T                 a+T
                                             g(x) dx =             g(x) dx.
                                         0                  a
    (c) Show that for any values of a and b,
                                       a+T                  b+T
                                              g(x) dx =             g(x) dx.
                                       a                      b
28. If f is differentiable and is periodic with period T, show that f  is also periodic with
    period T. Determine whether
                                                          x
                                               F(x) =         f (t) dt
                                                          0
    is always periodic.
29. In this problem we indicate certain similarities between three-dimensional geometric
    vectors and Fourier series.
    (a) Let v1 , v2 , and v3 be a set of mutually orthogonal vectors in three dimensions, and let
    u be any three-dimensional vector. Show that
                                           u = a1 v1 + a2 v2 + a3 v3 ,                              (i)
    where
                                                u · vi
                                        ai =           ,        i = 1, 2, 3.                       (ii)
                                               vi · vi
                   Show that ai can be interpreted as the projection of u in the direction of vi divided by the
                   length of vi .
                   (b) Define the inner product (u, v) by
                                                                         L
                                                              (u, v) =        u(x)v(x) dx.                                   (iii)
                                                                           −L
                   Also let
                                                   φn (x) = cos(nπx/L),             n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ;
                                                                                                                             (iv)
                                                   ψn (x) = sin(nπx/L),             n = 1, 2, . . . .
                   Show that Eq. (10) can be written in the form
                                                      a0               ∞                    ∞
                                         (f , φn ) =      (φ0 , φn ) +      am (φm , φn ) +      bm (ψm , φn ).               (v)
                                                       2               m=1                  m=1
                   (c) Use Eq. (v) and the corresponding equation for (f , ψn ), together with the orthogonal-
                   ity relations, to show that
                                    (f , φn )                                              (f , ψn )
                            an =               ,      n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ;        bn =                ,    n = 1, 2, . . . . (vi)
                                   (φn , φn )                                             (ψn , ψn )
                   Note the resemblance between Eqs. (vi) and Eq. (ii). The functions φn and ψn play a role
                   for functions similar to that of the orthogonal vectors v1 , v2 , and v3 in three-dimensional
                   space. The coefficients an and bn can be interpreted as projections of the function f onto
                   the base functions φn and ψn .
                       Observe also that any vector in three dimensions can be expressed as a linear combi-
                   nation of three mutually orthogonal vectors. In a somewhat similar way, any sufficiently
                   smooth function defined on −L ≤ x ≤ L can be expressed as a linear combination of the
                   mutually orthogonal functions cos(nπx/L) and sin(nπx/L), that is, as a Fourier series.
10.3 The Fourier Convergence Theorem
               In the preceding section we showed that if the Fourier series
                                                        ∞
                                               a0                       mπx                 mπx
                                                   +           am cos           + bm sin                                     (1)
                                                 2                         L                    L
                                                       m=1
               converges and thereby defines a function f , then f is periodic with period 2L, and the
               coefficients am and bm are related to f (x) by the Euler–Fourier formulas:
                                                   
                                                1 L                  mπx
                                     am =                f (x) cos           dx,        m = 0, 1, 2, . . . ;                 (2)
                                               L −L                    L
                                                   
                                                1 L                  mπx
                                    bm =                 f (x) sin          dx,        m = 1, 2, . . . .                     (3)
                                               L −L                    L
               In this section we suppose that a function f is given. If this function is periodic with
               period 2L and integrable on the interval [−L, L], then a set of coefficients am and
               bm can be computed from Eqs. (2) and (3), and a series of the form (1) can be
               formally constructed. The question is whether this series converges for each value
               of x and, if so, whether its sum is f (x). Examples have been discovered showing that
               the Fourier series corresponding to a function f may not converge to f (x) and may
               even diverge. Functions whose Fourier series do not converge to the value of the
               function at isolated points are easily constructed, and examples will be presented
               later in this section. Functions whose Fourier series diverge at one or more points
               are more pathological, and we will not consider them in this book.
                   To guarantee convergence of a Fourier series to the function from which its
               coefficients were computed, it is essential to place additional conditions on the func-
               tion. From a practical point of view, such conditions should be broad enough to cover
               all situations of interest, yet simple enough to be easily checked for particular func-
               tions. Through the years, several sets of conditions have been devised to serve this
               purpose.
                   Before stating a convergence theorem for Fourier series, we define a term
               that appears in the theorem. A function f is said to be piecewise continuous on
               an interval a ≤ x ≤ b if the interval can be partitioned by a finite number of points
               a = x0 < x1 < · · · < xn = b so that
               1. f is continuous on each open subinterval xi−1 < x < xi .
               2. f approaches a finite limit as the endpoints of each subinterval are approached from within
                     the subinterval.
               The graph of a piecewise continuous function is shown in Figure 10.3.1.
                                              y
                                                    a                      b       x
                                       FIGURE 10.3.1 A piecewise continuous function.
                   The notation f (c+) is used to denote the limit of f (x) as x → c from the right;
               similarly, f (c−) denotes the limit of f (x) as x approaches c from the left.
                   Note that it is not essential that the function even be defined at the partition points
               xi . For example, in the following theorem we assume that f  is piecewise continuous;
               but certainly f  does not exist at those points where f itself is discontinuous. It is also
               not essential that the interval be closed; it may also be open, or open at one end and
               closed at the other.
Theorem 10.3.1 Suppose that f and f  are piecewise continuous on the interval −L ≤ x < L. Further,
               suppose that f is defined outside the interval −L ≤ x < L so that it is periodic with
               period 2L. Then f has a Fourier series
                                                     ∞
                                               a0              mπx            mπx
                                      f (x) =     +     am cos       + bm sin          ,               (4)
                                                2                L               L
                                                    m=1
               whose coefficients are given by Eqs. (2) and (3). The Fourier series converges to
               f (x) at all points where f is continuous, and it converges to [f (x+) + f (x−)]/2 at all
               points where f is discontinuous.
            Note that [f (x+) + f (x−)]/2 is the mean value of the right- and left-hand limits
        at the point x. At any point where f is continuous, f (x+) = f (x−) = f (x). Thus it is
        correct to say that the Fourier series converges to [f (x+) + f (x−)]/2 at all points.
        Whenever we say that a Fourier series converges to a function f , we always mean
        that it converges in this sense.
           We emphasize that the conditions given in this theorem are only sufficient for the
        convergence of a Fourier series; they are by no means necessary. Nor are they
        the most general sufficient conditions that have been discovered. In spite of this,
        the proof of the theorem is fairly difficult, and we do not discuss it here.4 Under more
        restrictive conditions a much simpler convergence proof is possible; see Problem 18.
           To obtain a better understanding of the content of the theorem, it is helpful to con-
        sider some classes of functions that fail to satisfy the assumed conditions. Functions
        that are not included in the theorem are primarily those with infinite discontinuities
        in the interval [−L, L], such as 1/x2 as x → 0, or ln |x − L| as x → L. Functions having
        an infinite number of jump discontinuities in this interval are also excluded; however,
        such functions are rarely encountered.
            It is noteworthy that a Fourier series may converge to a sum that is not differ-
        entiable, or even continuous, in spite of the fact that each term in the series (4) is
        continuous, and even differentiable infinitely many times. The example below is an
        illustration of this, as is Example 2 in Section 10.2.
        Let
EXAMPLE                                               
                                                        0,   −L < x < 0,
   1                                         f (x) =
                                                        L,     0 < x < L,
                                                                                                             (5)
        and let f be defined outside this interval so that f (x + 2L) = f (x) for all x. We will temporarily
        leave open the definition of f at the points x = 0, ±L. Find the Fourier series for this function
        and determine where it converges.
                                                          y
                                                         L
                               –3L      –2L      –L                L       2L      3L        x
                                FIGURE 10.3.2 The square wave in Example 1.
           The equation y = f (x) has the graph shown in Figure 10.3.2, extended to infinity in both
        directions. It can be thought of as representing a square wave. The interval [−L, L] can be
        partitioned into the two open subintervals (−L, 0) and (0, L). In (0, L), f (x) = L and f  (x) = 0.
        Clearly, both f and f  are continuous and furthermore have limits as x → 0 from the right
        and as x → L from the left. The situation in (−L, 0) is similar. Consequently, both f and f 
        are piecewise continuous on [−L, L), so f satisfies the conditions of Theorem 10.3.1. If the
        4 Proofs of the convergence of a Fourier series can be found in most books on advanced calculus. See, for
        example, Kaplan (Chapter 7) or Buck (Chapter 6).
coefficients am and bm are computed from Eqs. (2) and (3), the convergence of the resulting
Fourier series to f (x) is ensured at all points where f is continuous. Note that the values of am
and bm are the same regardless of the definition of f at its points of discontinuity. This is true
because the value of an integral is unaffected by changing the value of the integrand at a finite
number of points. From Eq. (2),
                                             L                 L
                                         1
                                  a0 =             f (x) dx =       dx = L
                                         L    −L                0
and
                                    L                             L
                                 1                    mπx                  mπx
                           am =          f (x) cos          dx =       cos       dx
                                 L   −L                L            0       L
                                  L
                              =      (sin mπ − 0) = 0,            m  = 0.
                                 mπ
Similarly, from Eq. (3),
                                     L                            L
                                 1                    mπx                  mπx
                           bm =          f (x) sin         dx =       sin      dx
                                 L   −L                L           0        L
                                                           
                                  L                          0,          m even;
                              =       (1 − cos mπ) =
                                 mπ                          2L/mπ, m odd.
Hence
                                       
                             L 2L             πx 1            3πx 1         5πx
                     f (x) =    +         sin        + sin         + sin         + ···
                             2      π          L        3      L      5      L
                             L 2L          ∞
                                                    sin(mπx/L)
                           =    +
                             2      π                     m
                                       m=1,3,5,...
                             L 2L  sin(2n − 1)πx/L
                                        ∞
                           =    +                                 .                                  (6)
                             2      π n=1            2n − 1
   At the points x = 0, ±nL, where the function f in the example is not continuous, all terms in
the series after the first vanish and the sum is L/2. This is the mean value of the limits from the
right and left, as it should be. Thus we might as well define f at these points to have the value
L/2. If we choose to define it otherwise, the series still gives the value L/2 at these points,
since all of the preceding calculations remain valid. The series simply does not converge to
the function at those points unless f is defined to have the value L/2. This illustrates the
possibility that the Fourier series corresponding to a function may not converge to it at points
of discontinuity unless the function is suitably defined at such points.
   The manner in which the partial sums
                              
                    L 2L            πx                  1        (2n − 1)πx
          sn (x) =      +      sin      + ··· +              sin               ,     n = 1, 2, . . .
                    2      π        L                2n − 1           L
of the Fourier series (6) converge to f (x) is indicated in Figure 10.3.3, where L has been chosen
to be 1 and the graph of s8 (x) is plotted. The figure suggests that at points where f is continuous,
the partial sums do approach f (x) as n increases. However, in the neighborhood of points of
discontinuity, such as x = 0 and x = L, the partial sums do not converge smoothly to the mean
value. Instead, they tend to overshoot the mark at each end of the jump, as though they cannot
quite accommodate themselves to the sharp turn required at this point. This behavior is typical
of Fourier series at points of discontinuity and is known as the Gibbs5 phenomenon.
   Additional insight is attained by considering the error en (x) = f (x) − sn (x). Figure 10.3.4
shows a plot of |en (x)| versus x for n = 8 and for L = 1. The least upper bound of |e8 (x)| is 0.5
and is approached as x → 0 and as x → 1. As n increases, the error decreases in the interior
of the interval [where f (x) is continuous], but the least upper bound does not diminish with
increasing n. Thus we cannot uniformly reduce the error throughout the interval by increasing
the number of terms.
   Figures 10.3.3 and 10.3.4 also show that the series in this example converges more slowly
than the one in Example 1 in Section 10.2. This is due to the fact that the coefficients in the
series (6) are proportional only to 1/(2n − 1).
                                                 y
                                                  1                   n=8
                      –2           –1                            1               2     x
  FIGURE 10.3.3 The partial sum s8 (x) in the Fourier series, Eq. (6), for the square wave.
                e8(x)
                  0.5
                  0.4
                  0.3
                  0.2
                  0.1
                               0.2          0.4        0.6        0.8          1        x
           FIGURE 10.3.4 A plot of the error |e8 (x)| versus x for the square wave.
5The Gibbs phenomenon is named after Josiah Willard Gibbs (1839–1903), who is better known for his
work on vector analysis and statistical mechanics. Gibbs was professor of mathematical physics at Yale
and one of the first American scientists to achieve an international reputation. The Gibbs phenomenon is
discussed in more detail by Carslaw (Chapter 9).
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, assume that the given function is periodically extended
         outside the original interval.
         (a) Find the Fourier series for the extended function.
         (b) Sketch the graph of the function to which the series converges for three periods.
                                                                            
                         −1, −1 ≤ x < 0,                                       0, −π ≤ x < 0,
          1. f (x) =                                              2. f (x) =
                            1,    0≤x<1                                        x,       0≤x<π
                       
                         L + x, −L ≤ x < 0,
          3. f (x) =                                              4. f (x) = 1 − x2 , −1 ≤ x < 1
                         L − x,      0≤x<L
                       ⎧
                       ⎪        −π ≤ x < −π/2,                               
                       ⎨0,                                                     0,     −1 ≤ x < 0,
          5. f (x) = 1, −π/2 ≤ x < π/2,                           6. f (x) = 2
                       ⎪
                       ⎩0,                                                     x,        0≤x<1
                                π/2 ≤ x < π
         In each of Problems 7 through 12, assume that the given function is periodically extended
         outside the original interval.
         (a) Find the Fourier series for the given function.
         (b) Let en (x) = f (x) − sn (x). Find the least upper bound or the maximum value (if it exists)
         of |en (x)| for n = 10, 20, and 40.
         (c) If possible, find the smallest n for which |en (x)| ≤ 0.01 for all x.
                       
                         x, −π ≤ x < 0,
          7. f (x) =                                f (x + 2π) = f (x) (see Section 10.2, Problem 15)
                         0,     0 ≤ x < π;
                       
                         x + 1, −1 ≤ x < 0,
          8. f (x) =                                     f (x + 2) = f (x) (see Section 10.2, Problem 16)
                         1 − x,     0 ≤ x < 1;
          9. f (x) = x, −1 ≤ x < 1;              f (x + 2) = f (x) (see Section 10.2, Problem 20)
                       
                         x + 2,    −2 ≤ x < 0,
         10. f (x) =                                       f (x + 4) = f (x) (see Section 10.2, Problem 22)
                         2 − 2x,     0 ≤ x < 2;
                       
                         0,    −1 ≤ x < 0,
         11. f (x) = 2                              f (x + 2) = f (x) (see Problem 6)
                         x,      0 ≤ x < 1;
         12. f (x) = x − x3 ,     −1 ≤ x < 1;           f (x + 2) = f (x)
         Periodic Forcing Terms. In this chapter we are concerned mainly with the use of Fourier series
         to solve boundary value problems for certain partial differential equations. However, Fourier
         series are also useful in many other situations where periodic phenomena occur. Problems 13
         through 16 indicate how they can be employed to solve initial value problems with periodic
         forcing terms.
         13. Find the solution of the initial value problem
                                        y + ω2 y = sin nt,        y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0,
              where n is a positive integer and ω2  = n2 . What happens if ω2 = n2 ?
         14. Find the formal solution of the initial value problem
                                                  ∞
                                    y + ω2 y =       bn sin nt,       y(0) = 0,    y (0) = 0,
                                                  n=1
     where ω > 0 is not equal to a positive integer. How is the solution altered if ω = m, where
     m is a positive integer?
15. Find the formal solution of the initial value problem
                              y + ω2 y = f (t),        y(0) = 0,     y (0) = 0,
     where f is periodic with period 2π and
                                                 ⎧
                                                 ⎪
                                                 ⎨ 1,      0 < t < π;
                                        f (t) =      0,    t = 0, π, 2π;
                                                 ⎪
                                                 ⎩−1,      π < t < 2π.
     See Problem 1.
16. Find the formal solution of the initial value problem
                              y + ω2 y = f (t),        y(0) = 1,     y (0) = 0,
     where f is periodic with period 2 and
                                                
                                                    1 − t,    0 ≤ t < 1;
                                       f (t) =
                                                  −1 + t,     1 ≤ t < 2.
     See Problem 8.
17. Assuming that
                                       a0 
                                                ∞
                                                             nπx            nπx
                             f (x) =        +       an cos        + bn sin         ,                   (i)
                                        2      n=1
                                                              L               L
     show formally that
                                     L
                                                         a20  2
                                                                 ∞
                                  1
                                          [f (x)]2 dx =       +      (an + b2n ).
                                  L   −L                   2    n=1
     This relation between a function f and its Fourier coefficients is known as Parseval’s6
     equation. This relation is very important in the theory of Fourier series; see Problem 9 in
     Section 11.6.
     Hint: Multiply Eq. (i) by f (x), integrate from −L to L, and use the Euler–Fourier formulas.
18. This problem indicates a proof of convergence of a Fourier series under conditions more
     restrictive than those in Theorem 10.3.1.
     (a) If f and f  are piecewise continuous on −L ≤ x < L, and if f is periodic with period
     2L, show that nan and nbn are bounded as n → ∞.
     Hint: Use integration by parts.
     (b) If f is continuous on −L ≤ x ≤ L and periodic with period 2L, and if f  and f  are
     piecewise continuous on −L ≤ x < L, show that n2 an and n2 bn are bounded as n → ∞. If
     f is continuous on the closed interval, then it is continuous for all x. Why is this important?
     Hint: Again, use integration by parts.
6 Marc-Antoine Parseval (1755–1836) was a relatively obscure French mathematician for whom an impor-
tant result has been named. He presented a forerunner of this result in 1799, though not in the context of
Fourier series.
                                                                      ∞              ∞
                    (c) Using the result of part (b), show that            |an | and       |bn | converge.
                                                                      n=1             n=1
                    (d) From the result in part (c), show that the Fourier series (4) converges absolutely7 for
                    all x.
              Acceleration of Convergence. In the next problem, we show how it is sometimes possible to
              improve the speed of convergence of a Fourier series.
              19. Suppose that we wish to calculate values of the function g, where
                                                         ∞
                                                                 (2n − 1)
                                                g(x) =                          sin(2n − 1)πx.                      (i)
                                                         n=1
                                                              1 +  (2n − 1)2
                    It is possible to show that this series converges, albeit rather slowly. However, observe that
                    for large n the terms in the series (i) are approximately equal to [sin(2n − 1)πx]/(2n − 1)
                    and that the latter terms are similar to those in the example in the text, Eq. (6).
                    (a) Show that
                                          ∞
                                                                                                   
                                               [sin(2n − 1)πx]/(2n − 1) = (π/2) f (x) − 21 ,                       (ii)
                                          n=1
                    where f is the square wave in the example with L = 1.
                    (b) Subtract Eq. (ii) from Eq. (i) and show that
                                                  π                ∞
                                                                                 sin(2n − 1)πx
                                         g(x) =       f (x) − 21 −                                    .           (iii)
                                                  2                  n=1
                                                                          (2n   −  1)[1 + (2n − 1)2 ]
                    The series (iii) converges much faster than the series (i) and thus provides a better way to
                    calculate values of g(x).
10.4 Even and Odd Functions
              Before looking at further examples of Fourier series, it is useful to distinguish two
              classes of functions for which the Euler–Fourier formulas can be simplified. These
              are even and odd functions, which are characterized geometrically by the property of
              symmetry with respect to the y-axis and to the origin, respectively (see Figure 10.4.1).
                  Analytically, f is an even function if its domain contains the point −x whenever it
              contains the point x, and if
                                                             f (−x) = f (x)                                       (1)
              for each x in the domain of f . Similarly, f is an odd function if its domain contains
              −x whenever it contains x, and if
                                                           f (−x) = −f (x)                                        (2)
              7 It also converges uniformly; for an explanation of what this means, see a book on advanced calculus or
              analysis.
for each x in the domain of f . Examples of even functions are 1, x2 , cos nx, |x|, and
x2n . The functions x, x3 , sin nx, and x2n+1 are examples of odd functions. Note that
according to Eq. (2), f (0) must be zero if f is an odd function whose domain contains
the origin. Most functions are neither even nor odd; an example is ex . Only one
function, f identically zero, is both even and odd.
                             y                                    y
                                                x                                 x
                               (a)                                 (b)
                  FIGURE 10.4.1     (a) An even function. (b) An odd function.
   Elementary properties of even and odd functions include the following:
1. The sum (difference) and product (quotient) of two even functions are even.
2. The sum (difference) of two odd functions is odd; the product (quotient) of two odd
     functions is even.
3. The sum (difference) of an odd function and an even function is neither even nor odd; the
     product (quotient) of two such functions is odd.8
The proofs of all these assertions are simple and follow directly from the definitions.
For example, if both f1 and f2 are odd, and if g(x) = f1 (x) + f2 (x), then
                         g(−x) = f1 (−x) + f2 (−x) = −f1 (x) − f2 (x)
                                  = −[f1 (x) + f2 (x)] = −g(x),                          (3)
so f1 + f2 is an odd function also. Similarly, if h(x) = f1 (x)f2 (x), then
               h(−x) = f1 (−x)f2 (−x) = [−f1 (x)][−f2 (x)] = f1 (x)f2 (x) = h(x),        (4)
so that f1 f2 is even.
   Also of importance are the following two integral properties of even and odd
functions:
4.   If f is an even function, then
                                      L                L
                                          f (x) dx = 2     f (x) dx.                     (5)
                                      −L                0
8These statements may need to be modified if either function vanishes identically.
5.  If f is an odd function, then
                                               L
                                                   f (x) dx = 0.                           (6)
                                               −L
   These properties are intuitively clear from the interpretation of an integral in
terms of area under a curve, and they also follow immediately from the definitions.
For example, if f is even, then
                            L                 0                 L
                               f (x) dx =          f (x) dx +         f (x) dx.
                            −L                 −L                  0
Letting x = −s in the first term on the right side and using Eq. (1), we obtain
                  L                  0                L                   L
                     f (x) dx = −         f (s) ds +         f (x) dx = 2        f (x) dx.
                  −L                   L                 0                   0
The proof of the corresponding property for odd functions is similar.
   Even and odd functions are particularly important in applications of Fourier series
since their Fourier series have special forms, which occur frequently in physical
problems.
Cosine Series. Suppose that f and f  are piecewise continuous on −L ≤ x < L and
that f is an even periodic function with period 2L. Then it follows from properties 1
and 3 that f (x) cos(nπx/L) is even and f (x) sin(nπx/L) is odd. As a consequence of
Eqs. (5) and (6), the Fourier coefficients of f are then given by
                               
                             2 L                nπx
                     an =            f (x) cos         dx,        n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ;
                            L 0                   L
                                                                                           (7)
                     bn = 0,         n = 1, 2, . . . .
Thus f has the Fourier series
                                                     ∞
                                             a0                  nπx
                                  f (x) =       +        an cos        .
                                             2                      L
                                                    n=1
In other words, the Fourier series of any even function consists only of the even
trigonometric functions cos(nπx/L) and the constant term; it is natural to call such
a series a Fourier cosine series. From a computational point of view, observe that
only the coefficients an , for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , need to be calculated from the integral
formula (7). Each of the bn , for n = 1, 2, . . . , is automatically zero for any even
function and so does not need to be calculated by integration.
Sine Series. Suppose that f and f  are piecewise continuous on −L ≤ x < L and that
f is an odd periodic function of period 2L. Then it follows from properties 2 and 3
that f (x) cos(nπx/L) is odd and f (x) sin(nπx/L) is even. Thus, from Eqs. (5) and (6),
the Fourier coefficients of f are
                        an = 0,         n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
                                  L                                                       (8)
                              2                   nπx
                       bn =            f (x) sin        dx,         n = 1, 2, . . . ,
                              L    0               L
        and the Fourier series for f is
                                                            ∞
                                                                         nπx
                                                 f (x) =        bn sin          .
                                                                          L
                                                            n=1
        Thus the Fourier series for any odd function consists only of the odd trigonometric
        functions sin(nπx/L); such a series is called a Fourier sine series. Again observe that
        only half of the coefficients need to be calculated by integration, since each an , for
        n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , is zero for any odd function.
        Let f (x) = x, −L < x < L, and let f (−L) = f (L) = 0. Let f be defined elsewhere so that it is
EXAMPLE periodic of period 2L (see Figure 10.4.2). The function defined in this manner is known as a
   1    sawtooth wave. Find the Fourier series for this function.
                                                             y
                                                             L
                              –3L      –2L        –L                     L           2L      3L x
                                                            –L
                                 FIGURE 10.4.2 The sawtooth wave in Example 1.
           Since f is an odd function, its Fourier coefficients are, according to Eq. (8),
                                    an = 0,         n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ;
                                              L
                                           2              nπx
                                    bn =           x sin        dx
                                          L    0            L
                                                                                      L
                                           2     L     2
                                                               nπx nπx              nπx   
                                        =                  sin        −       cos         
                                          L     nπ              L        L            L   
                                                                                          
                                                                                           0
                                          2L
                                        =     (−1)n+1 ,         n = 1, 2, . . . .
                                          nπ
        Hence the Fourier series for f , the sawtooth wave, is
                                                      2L  (−1)n+1
                                                            ∞
                                                                               nπx
                                           f (x) =                       sin         .                (9)
                                                       π n=1        n             L
        Observe that the periodic function f is discontinuous at the points ±L, ±3L, . . . , as shown in
        Figure 10.4.2. At these points the series (9) converges to the mean value of the left and right
        limits, namely, zero. The partial sum of the series (9) for n = 9 is shown in Figure 10.4.3. The
        Gibbs phenomenon (mentioned in Section 10.3) again occurs near the points of discontinuity.
                                                y
                                                L
                     –2L             –L                    L               2L     x
                          n=9
                                              –L
     FIGURE 10.4.3 A partial sum in the Fourier series, Eq. (9), for the sawtooth wave.
   Note that in this example f (−L) = f (L) = 0, as well as f (0) = 0. This is required
if the function f is to be both odd and periodic with period 2L. When we speak
of constructing a sine series for a function defined on 0 ≤ x ≤ L, it is understood
that, if necessary, we must first redefine the function to be zero at x = 0 and
x = L.
   It is worthwhile to observe that the triangular wave function (Example 1 of Section
10.2) and the sawtooth wave function just considered are identical on the interval
0 ≤ x < L. Therefore, their Fourier series converge to the same function, f (x) = x,
on this interval. Thus, if it is required to represent the function f (x) = x on 0 ≤ x < L
by a Fourier series, it is possible to do this by either a cosine series or a sine series. In
the former case, f is extended as an even function into the interval −L < x < 0 and
elsewhere periodically (the triangular wave). In the latter case, f is extended into
−L < x < 0 as an odd function and elsewhere periodically (the sawtooth wave). If
f is extended in any other way, the resulting Fourier series will still converge to x in
0 ≤ x < L but will involve both sine and cosine terms.
   In solving problems in differential equations, it is often useful to expand in a
Fourier series of period 2L a function f originally defined only on the interval [0, L].
As indicated previously for the function f (x) = x, several alternatives are available.
Explicitly, we can
1.   Define a function g of period 2L so that
                                           
                                            f (x),     0 ≤ x ≤ L,
                                    g(x) =                                                     (10)
                                             f (−x), −L < x < 0.
    The function g is thus the even periodic extension of f . Its Fourier series, which is a cosine
     series, represents f on [0, L].
2. Define a function h of period 2L so that
                                          ⎧
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎨ f (x),      0 < x < L,
                                  h(x) =       0,       x = 0, L,                              (11)
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎩−f (−x),   −L < x < 0.
             The function h is thus the odd periodic extension of f . Its Fourier series, which is a sine
             series, also represents f on (0, L).
        3. Define a function k of period 2L so that
                                                k(x) = f (x),    0 ≤ x ≤ L,                           (12)
             and let k(x) be defined for (−L, 0) in any way consistent with the conditions of Theorem
             10.3.1. Sometimes it is convenient to define k(x) to be zero for −L < x < 0. The Fourier
             series for k, which involves both sine and cosine terms, also represents f on [0, L], regard-
             less of the manner in which k(x) is defined in (−L, 0). Thus there are infinitely many such
             series, all of which converge to f (x) in the original interval.
           Usually, the form of the expansion to be used will be dictated (or at least suggested)
        by the purpose for which it is needed. However, if there is a choice as to the kind
        of Fourier series to be used, the selection can sometimes be based on the rapidity
        of convergence. For example, the cosine series for the triangular wave [Eq. (20) of
        Section 10.2] converges more rapidly than the sine series for the sawtooth wave
        [Eq. (9) in this section], although both converge to the same function for 0 ≤ x < L.
        This is because the triangular wave is a smoother function than the sawtooth wave
        and is therefore easier to approximate. In general, the more continuous derivatives
        possessed by a function over the entire interval −∞ < x < ∞, the faster its Fourier
        series will converge. See Problem 18 of Section 10.3.
        Suppose that                                
EXAMPLE                                               1 − x,  0 < x ≤ 1,
                                            f (x) =                                                   (13)
   2                                                  0,      1 < x ≤ 2.
        As indicated previously, we can represent f either by a cosine series or by a sine series. Sketch
        the graph of the sum of each of these series for −6 ≤ x ≤ 6.
           In this example L = 2, so the cosine series for f converges to the even periodic extension
        of f of period 4, whose graph is sketched in Figure 10.4.4.
                                                          y
                                                          1
                             –6       –4         –2                2          4     6    x
                                                         –1
                       FIGURE 10.4.4      Even periodic extension of f (x) given by Eq. (13).
           Similarly, the sine series for f converges to the odd periodic extension of f of period 4. The
        graph of this function is shown in Figure 10.4.5.
                                                          y
                                                          1
                             –6       –4         –2                2          4     6    x
                                                         –1
                       FIGURE 10.4.5       Odd periodic extension of f (x) given by Eq. (13).
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, determine whether the given function is even, odd, or neither.
          1. x3 − 2x                                         2. x3 − 2x + 1
          3. tan 2x                                          4. sec x
          5. |x|3
                                                             6. e−x
         In each of Problems 7 through 12, a function f is given on an interval of length L. In each case
         sketch the graphs of the even and odd extensions of f of period 2L.
                                                                       
                       x,     0 ≤ x < 2,                                  0,      0 ≤ x < 1,
          7. f (x) =                                         8. f (x) =
                       1,     2≤x<3                                       x − 1,  1≤x<2
          9. f (x) = 2 − x,     0<x<2                      10. f (x) = x − 3,    0<x<4
                     
                       0,     0 ≤ x < 1,
         11. f (x) =                                       12. f (x) = 4 − x2 ,  0<x<1
                       1,     1≤x<2
         13. Prove that any function can be expressed as the sum of two other functions, one of which
             is even and the other odd. That is, for any function f , whose domain contains −x whenever
             it contains x, show that there are an even function g and an odd function h such that
             f (x) = g(x) + h(x).
             Hint: What can you say about f (x) + f (−x)?
         14. Find the coefficients in the cosine and sine series described in Example 2.
         In each of Problems 15 through 22:
         (a) Find the required Fourier series for the given function.
         (b) Sketch the graph of the function to which the series converges over three periods.
                     
                       1,     0 < x < 1,
         15. f (x) =                           cosine series, period 4
                       0,     1 < x < 2;
             Compare with Example 1 and Problem 5 of Section 10.3.
                     
                       x,     0 ≤ x < 1,
         16. f (x) =                           sine series, period 4
                       1,     1 ≤ x < 2;
         17. f (x) = 1,     0 ≤ x ≤ π;     cosine series, period 2π
         18. f (x) = 1,     0 < x < π;     sine series, period 2π
                     ⎧
                     ⎪
                     ⎨0,        0 < x < π,
         19. f (x) = 1,        π < x < 2π,          sine series, period 6π
                     ⎪
                     ⎩2,      2π < x < 3π;
         20. f (x) = x,     0 ≤ x < 1;      series of period 1
         21. f (x) = L − x,      0 ≤ x ≤ L;        cosine series, period 2L
             Compare with Example 1 of Section 10.2.
         22. f (x) = L − x,      0 < x < L;       sine series, period 2L
         In each of Problems 23 through 26:
         (a) Find the required Fourier series for the given function.
         (b) Sketch the graph of the function to which the series converges for three periods.
         (c) Plot one or more partial sums of the series.
            
              x,       0 < x < π,
23. f (x) =                                  cosine series, period 4π
              0,       π < x < 2π;
24. f (x) = −x,         −π < x < 0;         sine series, period 2π
25. f (x) = 2 − x ,
                 2
                            0 < x < 2;        sine series, period 4
26. f (x) = x − 2x,
             2
                              0 < x < 4;        cosine series, period 8
In each of Problems 27 through 30, a function is given on an interval 0 < x < L.
(a) Sketch the graphs of the even extension g(x) and the odd extension h(x) of the given
function of period 2L over three periods.
(b) Find the Fourier cosine and sine series for the given function.
(c) Plot a few partial sums of each series.
(d) For each series, investigate the dependence on n of the maximum error on [0, L].
27. f (x) = 3 − x,         0<x<3
            
              x,       0 < x < 1,
28. f (x) =
              0,       1<x<2
29. f (x) = (4x2 − 4x − 3)/4,           0<x<2
30. f (x) = x − 5x + 5x + 1,
             3       2
                                         0<x<3
31. Prove that if f is an odd function, then
                                                   L
                                                       f (x) dx = 0.
                                                   −L
32. Prove properties 2 and 3 of even and odd functions, as stated in the text.
33. Prove that the derivative of an even function is odd and that the derivative of an odd
    function is even.
                  x
34. Let F(x) =         f (t) dt. Show that if f is even, then F is odd, and that if f is odd, then F is
                   0
    even.
35. From the Fourier series for the square wave in Example 1 of Section 10.3, show that
                                   π         1 1 1                   ∞
                                                                            (−1)n
                                      = 1 − + − + ··· =                             .
                                   4         3 5 7                   n=0
                                                                            2n + 1
    This relation between π and the odd positive integers was discovered by Leibniz in 1674.
36. From the Fourier series for the triangular wave (Example 1 of Section 10.2), show that
                                  π2          1       1           ∞
                                                                             1
                                       = 1 + 2 + 2 + ··· =                           .
                                   8          3       5           n=0
                                                                       (2n   +  1)2
37. Assume that f has a Fourier sine series
                                          ∞
                                  f (x) =     bn sin(nπx/L),          0 ≤ x ≤ L.
                                          n=1
    (a) Show formally that                     L
                                           2                      ∞
                                                   [f (x)]2 dx =      b2n .
                                           L    0                 n=1
    Compare this result (Parseval’s equation) with that of Problem 17 in Section 10.3. What
    is the corresponding result if f has a cosine series?
     (b) Apply the result of part (a) to the series for the sawtooth wave given in Eq. (9), and
     thereby show that
                                     π2             1       1          ∞
                                                                             1
                                         = 1 + 2 + 2 + ··· =                  2
                                                                                .
                                      6            2        3          n=1
                                                                           n
     This relation was discovered by Euler in about 1735.
More Specialized Fourier Series. Let f be a function originally defined on 0 ≤ x ≤ L and
satisfying there the continuity conditions of Theorem 10.3.1. In this section we have shown
that it is possible to represent f by either a sine series or a cosine series by constructing odd or
even periodic extensions of f , respectively. Problems 38 through 40 concern some other, more
specialized Fourier series that converge to the given function f on (0, L).
38. Let f be extended into (L, 2L] in an arbitrary manner subject to the continuity conditions
     of Theorem 10.3.1. Then extend the resulting function into (−2L, 0) as an odd function and
     elsewhere as a periodic function of period 4L (see Figure 10.4.6). Show that this function
     has a Fourier sine series in terms of the functions sin(nπx/2L), n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ; that is,
                                                    ∞
                                          f (x) =         bn sin(nπx/2L),
                                                    n=1
     where
                                                  2L
                                              1
                                      bn =              f (x) sin(nπx/2L) dx.
                                             L    0
     This series converges to the original function on (0, L).
                                                      y
                                  –2L       –L
                                                                  L     2L x
                      FIGURE 10.4.6          Graph of the function in Problem 38.
39. Let f first be extended into (L, 2L) so that it is symmetric about x = L. Then f satisfies
     f (2L − x) = f (x) for 0 ≤ x < L. Let the resulting function be extended into (−2L, 0) as an
     odd function and elsewhere as a periodic function of period 4L (see Figure 10.4.7). Show
     that this function has a Fourier series in terms of the functions sin(πx/2L), sin(3πx/2L),
     sin(5πx/2L), . . . ; that is,
                                                   ∞
                                                                (2n − 1)πx
                                        f (x) =         bn sin             ,
                                                   n=1
                                                                    2L
     where                                       L
                                             2                  (2n − 1)πx
                                     bn =            f (x) sin              dx.
                                             L   0                  2L
     This series converges to the original function on (0, L].
                                                                 y
                                               –2 L      –L                L        2L x
                                    FIGURE 10.4.7         Graph of the function in Problem 39.
               40. (a) How should f , originally defined on [0, L], be extended so as to obtain a Fourier
                   series involving only the functions cos(πx/2L), cos(3πx/2L), cos(5πx/2L), . . .? Refer to
                   Problems 38 and 39.
                   (b) If f (x) = x for 0 ≤ x ≤ L, sketch the function to which the Fourier series converges
                   for −4L ≤ x ≤ 4L.
10.5 Separation of Variables; Heat Conduction in a Rod
               The basic partial differential equations of heat conduction, wave propagation, and
               potential theory that we discuss in this chapter are associated with three distinct
               types of physical phenomena: diffusive processes, oscillatory processes, and time-
               independent or steady processes. Consequently, they are of fundamental importance
               in many branches of physics. They are also of considerable significance from a
               mathematical point of view. The partial differential equations whose theory is best
               developed and whose applications are most significant and varied are the linear
               equations of second order. All such equations can be classified into one of three cat-
               egories: the heat conduction equation, the wave equation, and the potential equation,
               respectively, are prototypes of these categories. Thus a study of these three equations
               yields much information about more general second order linear partial differential
               equations.
                  During the last two centuries, several methods have been developed for solving
               partial differential equations. The method of separation of variables is the oldest
               systematic method, having been used by D’Alembert, Daniel Bernoulli, and Euler
               about 1750 in their investigations of waves and vibrations. It has been considerably
               refined and generalized in the meantime, and it remains a method of great importance
               and frequent use today. To show how the method of separation of variables works,
               we consider first a basic problem of heat conduction in a solid body. The mathematical
               study of heat conduction originated9 about 1800, and it continues to command the
               attention of modern scientists. For example, analysis of the dissipation and transfer
               9The first important investigation of heat conduction was carried out by Joseph Fourier. He presented basic
               papers on the subject to the Academy of Sciences of Paris in 1807 and 1811. Although these papers were
               controversial and were not published at the time, Fourier continued to develop his ideas and eventually
               wrote one of the classics of applied mathematics, Théorie analytique de la chaleur, published in 1822.
of heat away from its sources in high-speed machinery is frequently an important
technological problem.
   Let us now consider a heat conduction problem for a straight bar of uniform cross
section and homogeneous material. Let the x-axis be chosen to lie along the axis
of the bar, and let x = 0 and x = L denote the ends of the bar (see Figure 10.5.1).
Suppose further that the sides of the bar are perfectly insulated so that no heat passes
through them. We also assume that the cross-sectional dimensions are so small that
the temperature u can be considered constant on any given cross section. Then u is
a function only of the axial coordinate x and the time t.
                                             u(x, t)
                                                                        x
                    x=0                                          x=L
                      FIGURE 10.5.1 A heat-conducting solid bar.
   The variation of temperature in the bar is governed by a partial differential
equation whose derivation appears in Appendix A at the end of this chapter. The
equation is called the heat conduction equation and has the form
                        α2 uxx = ut ,     0 < x < L,          t > 0,                  (1)
where α2 is a constant known as the thermal diffusivity. The parameter α2 depends
only on the material from which the bar is made and is defined by
                                       α2 = κ/ρs,                                     (2)
where κ is the thermal conductivity, ρ is the density, and s is the specific heat of the
material in the bar. The units of α2 are (length)2 /time. Typical values of α2 are given
in Table 10.5.1.
                         TABLE 10.5.1 Values of the Thermal
                         Diffusivity for Some Common
                         Materials
                              Material               α2 (cm2 /s)
                            Silver                      1.71
                            Copper                      1.14
                            Aluminum                    0.86
                            Cast iron                   0.12
                            Granite                     0.011
                            Brick                       0.0038
                            Water                       0.00144
   In addition, we assume that the initial temperature distribution in the bar is given;
thus
                            u(x, 0) = f (x),       0 ≤ x ≤ L,                         (3)
where f is a given function. Finally, we assume that the ends of the bar are held at fixed
temperatures: the temperature T1 at x = 0 and the temperature T2 at x = L. How-
ever, it turns out that we need only consider the case where T1 = T2 = 0. We show
in Section 10.6 how to reduce the more general problem to this special case. Thus, in
this section we will assume that u is always zero when x = 0 or x = L:
                           u(0, t) = 0,     u(L, t) = 0,     t > 0.                       (4)
The fundamental problem of heat conduction is to find u(x, t) that satisfies the differ-
ential equation (1) for 0 < x < L and for t > 0, the initial condition (3) when t = 0,
and the boundary conditions (4) at x = 0 and x = L.
   The problem described by Eqs. (1), (3), and (4) is an initial value problem in the
time variable t; an initial condition is given, and the differential equation governs
what happens later. However, with respect to the space variable x, the problem is
a boundary value problem; boundary conditions are imposed at each end of the
bar, and the differential equation describes the evolution of the temperature in the
interval between them. Alternatively, we can consider the problem as a boundary
value problem in the xt-plane (see Figure 10.5.2). The solution u(x, t) of Eq. (1) is
sought in the semi-infinite strip 0 < x < L, t > 0, subject to the requirement that
u(x, t) must assume a prescribed value at each point on the boundary of this strip.
                                    t
                                                        x=L
                        u(0, t) = 0      α 2uxx = ut        u(L, t) = 0
                                         u(x, 0) = f(x)         x
        FIGURE 10.5.2      Boundary value problem for the heat conduction equation.
  The heat conduction problem (1), (3), (4) is linear since u appears only to the
first power throughout. The differential equation and boundary conditions are also
homogeneous.This suggests that we might approach the problem by seeking solutions
of the differential equation and boundary conditions, and then superposing them to
satisfy the initial condition. The remainder of this section describes how this plan can
be implemented.
Method of Separation of Variables. One solution of the differential equation (1) that sat-
isfies the boundary conditions (4) is the function u(x, t) = 0, but this solution does
not satisfy the initial condition (3) except in the trivial case in which f (x) is also zero.
Thus our goal is to find other, nonzero solutions of the differential equation and
boundary conditions. To find the needed solutions, we start by making a basic assump-
tion about the form of the solutions that has far-reaching, and perhaps unforeseen,
consequences. The assumption is that u(x, t) is a product of two functions, one
depending only on x and the other depending only on t; thus
                                   u(x, t) = X (x)T(t).                              (5)
We will simplify the following derivation by often omitting the independent variables
x and t; our notation is intended to indicate that the functions X and T depend on
the variables x and t, respectively.
   Substituting from Eq. (5) for u in the differential equation (1) yields
                                      α2 X  T = XT  ,                             (6)
where primes refer to ordinary differentiation with respect to the independent
variable, whether x or t. Equation (6) is equivalent to
                                        X      1 T
                                             = 2 ,                                   (7)
                                         X       α T
in which the variables are separated; that is, the left side depends only on x and the
right side only on t.
   It is now crucial to realize that for Eq. (7) to be valid for 0 < x < L, t > 0, it is
necessary that both sides of Eq. (7) must be equal to the same constant. Otherwise,
if one independent variable (say, x) were kept fixed and the other were allowed to
vary, one side (the left in this case) of Eq. (7) would remain unchanged while the
other varied, thus violating the equality. If we call this separation constant −λ, then
Eq. (7) becomes
                                   X        1 T
                                          = 2      = −λ.                             (8)
                                    X        α T
Hence we obtain the following two ordinary differential equations for X (x) and T(t):
                                       X  + λX = 0,                                (9)
                                        
                                     T + α λT = 0.
                                               2
                                                                                    (10)
We denote the separation constant by −λ (rather than λ) because in this problem
it turns out that it must be negative, and it is convenient to exhibit the minus sign
explicitly.
   The assumption (5) has led to the replacement of the partial differential equation
(1) by the two ordinary differential equations (9) and (10). Each of these equations is
linear and homogeneous, with constant coefficients, and so can be readily solved for
any value of λ. The product of two solutions of Eq. (9) and (10), respectively, provides
a solution of the partial differential equation (1). However, we are interested only in
those solutions of Eq. (1) that also satisfy the boundary conditions (4). As we now
show, this severely restricts the possible values of λ.
   Substituting for u(x, t) from Eq. (5) in the boundary condition at x = 0, we obtain
                                 u(0, t) = X (0)T(t) = 0.                           (11)
If Eq. (11) is satisfied by choosing T(t) to be zero for all t, then u(x, t) is zero for
all x and t, and we have already rejected this possibility. Therefore, Eq. (11) must be
satisfied by requiring that
                                            X (0) = 0.                             (12)
Similarly, the boundary condition at x = L requires that
                                            X (L) = 0.                             (13)
   We now want to consider Eq. (9) subject to the boundary conditions (12) and (13).
This is an eigenvalue problem and, in fact, is the same problem that we discussed in
detail at the end of Section 10.1; see especially the paragraph following Eq. (29) in
that section. The only difference is that the dependent variable there was called y
rather than X . If we refer to the results obtained earlier [Eq. (31) of Section 10.1],
the only nontrivial solutions of Eqs. (9), (12), and (13) are the eigenfunctions
                          Xn (x) = sin(nπx/L),          n = 1, 2, 3, . . .         (14)
associated with the eigenvalues
                             λn = n2 π2 /L2 ,       n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .           (15)
   Turning now to Eq. (10) for T(t) and substituting n2 π2 /L2 for λ, we have
                                   T  + (n2 π2 α2 /L2 )T = 0.                     (16)
Thus T(t) is proportional to exp(−n2 π2 α2 t/L2 ). Hence, multiplying solutions of
Eqs. (9) and (10) together, and neglecting arbitrary constants of proportionality, we
conclude that the functions
                  un (x, t) = e−n π α t/L sin(nπx/L),
                                  2 2 2   2
                                                               n = 1, 2, 3, . . .  (17)
satisfy the partial differential equation (1) and the boundary conditions (4) for each
positive integer value of n. The functions un are sometimes called fundamental
solutions of the heat conduction problem (1), (3), and (4).
   It remains only to satisfy the initial condition (3):
                               u(x, 0) = f (x),       0 ≤ x ≤ L.                   (18)
Recall that we have often solved an initial value problem by using the principle of
superposition; that is, we form a linear combination of a set of fundamental solutions
of the differential equation and then choose the coefficients to satisfy the initial
conditions. The analogous step in the present problem is to form a linear combination
of the functions (17) and then to choose the coefficients to satisfy Eq. (18). The main
difference from earlier problems is that there are infinitely many functions (17), so a
general linear combination of them is an infinite series. Thus we assume that
                              ∞                 ∞
                                                                           nπx
                                                     cn e−n π α t/L sin
                                                           2 2 2     2
                   u(x, t) =      cn un (x, t) =                               ,   (19)
                                                                            L
                              n=1                n=1
where the coefficients cn are as yet undetermined. The individual terms in the series
(19) satisfy the differential equation (1) and boundary conditions (4). We will assume
        that the infinite series of Eq. (19) converges and also satisfies Eqs. (1) and (4). To
        satisfy the initial condition (3), we must have
                                                    ∞
                                                                    nπx
                                         u(x, 0) =         cn sin           = f (x).                 (20)
                                                                      L
                                                    n=1
        In other words,we need to choose the coefficients cn so that the series of sine functions
        in Eq. (20) converges to the initial temperature distribution f (x) for 0 ≤ x ≤ L. The
        series in Eq. (20) is just the Fourier sine series for f ; according to Eq. (8) of Section
        10.4, its coefficients are given by
                                                     L
                                                  2                     nπx
                                           cn =             f (x) sin           dx.                  (21)
                                                  L   0                   L
        Hence the solution of the heat conduction problem of Eqs. (1), (3), and (4) is given
        by the series in Eq. (19) with the coefficients computed from Eq. (21).
        Find the temperature u(x, t) at any time in a metal rod 50 cm long, insulated on the sides, which
EXAMPLE initially has a uniform temperature of 20◦ C throughout and whose ends are maintained at 0◦ C
   1    for all t > 0.
           The temperature in the rod satisfies the heat conduction problem (1), (3), (4) with L = 50
        and f (x) = 20 for 0 < x < 50. Thus, from Eq. (19), the solution is
                                                  ∞
                                                                2 2 2            nπx
                                        u(x, t) =      cn e−n π α t/2500 sin          ,              (22)
                                                  n=1
                                                                                  50
        where, from Eq. (21),
                                 50                                            
                              4          nπx         40                           80/nπ,   n odd;
                         cn =        sin       dx =       (1 − cos nπ) =                             (23)
                              5   0       50         nπ                           0,       n even.
        Finally, by substituting for cn in Eq. (22), we obtain
                                               80   ∞
                                                              1 −n2 π2 α2 t/2500     nπx
                                    u(x, t) =                   e                sin     .           (24)
                                                π             n                       50
                                                  n=1,3,5,...
           The expression (24) for the temperature is moderately complicated, but the negative expo-
        nential factor in each term of the series causes the series to converge quite rapidly, except for
        small values of t or α2 . Therefore, accurate results can usually be obtained by using only the
        first few terms of the series.
           In order to display quantitative results, let us measure t in seconds; then α2 has the units
        of cm2 /s. If we choose α2 = 1 for convenience, this corresponds to a rod of a material whose
        thermal properties are somewhere between copper and aluminum. The behavior of the solu-
        tion can be seen from the graphs in Figures 10.5.3 through 10.5.5. In Figure 10.5.3 we show
        the temperature distribution in the bar at several different times. Observe that the tempera-
        ture diminishes steadily as heat in the bar is lost through the end points. The way in which the
        temperature decays at a given point in the bar is indicated in Figure 10.5.4, where temperature
        is plotted against time for a few selected points in the bar. Finally, Figure 10.5.5 is a three-
        dimensional plot of u versus both x and t. Observe that we obtain the graphs in Figures 10.5.3
                  u
                          t=0
                 20
                        t = 20
                                    t = 50
                 15
                                     t = 150
                 10
                                       t = 300
                  5
                              10          20        30       40        50       x
                 FIGURE 10.5.3 Temperature distributions at several times
                        for the heat conduction problem of Example 1.
                  u
                 20
                 15
                      x=5
                 10            x = 15            x = 25
                  5
                             100         200       300      400       500       t
         FIGURE 10.5.4 Dependence of temperature on time at several locations
                        for the heat conduction problem of Example 1.
and 10.5.4 by intersecting the surface in Figure 10.5.5 by planes on which either t or x is con-
stant. The slight waviness in Figure 10.5.5 at t = 0 results from using only a finite number of
terms in the series for u(x, t) and from the slow convergence of the series for t = 0.
   A problem with possible practical implications is to determine the time τ at which the
entire bar has cooled to a specified temperature. For example, when is the temperature in
the entire bar no greater than 1◦ C? Because of the symmetry of the initial temperature distri-
bution and the boundary conditions, the warmest point in the bar is always the center. Thus τ
is found by solving u(25, t) = 1 for t. Using one term in the series expansion (24), we obtain
                                          2500
                                    τ=         ln(80/π) ∼
                                                        = 820 s.
                                           π2
                                                                u
                                                           20
                                                           15
                                                           10
                                                            5
                                                        10            50
                                                 20                         100
                                         30                                         150
                                  40                                                     200
                           50                                                                  250
                         x                                                                        t
                               FIGURE 10.5.5 Plot of temperature u versus x and t for
                                      the heat conduction problem of Example 1.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, determine whether the method of separation of variables
         can be used to replace the given partial differential equation by a pair of ordinary differential
         equations. If so, find the equations.
           1. xuxx + ut = 0                                      2. tuxx + xut = 0
           3. uxx + uxt + ut = 0                                 4. [p(x)ux ]x − r(x)utt = 0
           5. uxx + (x + y)uyy = 0                               6. uxx + uyy + xu = 0
           7. Find the solution of the heat conduction problem
                                          100uxx = ut ,       0 < x < 1,     t > 0;
                                           u(0, t) = 0,     u(1, t) = 0,     t > 0;
                                          u(x, 0) = sin 2πx − sin 5πx,         0 ≤ x ≤ 1.
           8. Find the solution of the heat conduction problem
                                     uxx = 4ut ,       0 < x < 2,     t > 0;
                                  u(0, t) = 0,      u(2, t) = 0,    t > 0;
                                 u(x, 0) = 2 sin(πx/2) − sin πx + 4 sin 2πx,           0 ≤ x ≤ 2.
         Consider the conduction of heat in a rod 40 cm in length whose ends are maintained at 0◦ C
         for all t > 0. In each of Problems 9 through 12, find an expression for the temperature u(x, t)
         if the initial temperature distribution in the rod is the given function. Suppose that α2 = 1.
           9. u(x, 0) = 50,        0 < x < 40
                          
                            x,             0 ≤ x < 20,
         10. u(x, 0) =
                            40 − x,       20 ≤ x ≤ 40
               ⎧
               ⎪
               ⎨ 0,        0 ≤ x < 10,
11. u(x, 0) = 50,        10 ≤ x ≤ 30,
               ⎪
               ⎩ 0,      30 < x ≤ 40
12. u(x, 0) = x,      0 < x < 40
13. Consider again the rod in Problem 9. For t = 5 and x = 20, determine how many terms are
    needed to find the solution correct to three decimal places. A reasonable way to do this is
    to find n so that including one more term does not change the first three decimal places of
    u(20, 5). Repeat for t = 20 and t = 80. Form a conclusion about the speed of convergence
    of the series for u(x, t).
14. For the rod in Problem 9:
    (a) Plot u versus x for t = 5, 10, 20, 40, 100, and 200. Put all of the graphs on the same
    set of axes and thereby obtain a picture of the way in which the temperature distribution
    changes with time.
    (b) Plot u versus t for x = 5, 10, 15, and 20.
    (c) Draw a three-dimensional plot of u versus x and t.
    (d) How long does it take for the entire rod to cool off to a temperature of no more than
    1◦ C?
15. Follow the instructions in Problem 14 for the rod in Problem 10.
16. Follow the instructions in Problem 14 for the rod in Problem 11.
17. For the rod in Problem 12:
    (a) Plot u versus x for t = 5, 10, 20, 40, 100, and 200.
    (b) For each value of t used in part (a), estimate the value of x for which the temperature
    is greatest. Plot these values versus t to see how the location of the warmest point in the
    rod changes with time.
    (c) Plot u versus t for x = 10, 20, and 30.
    (d) Draw a three-dimensional plot of u versus x and t.
    (e) How long does it take the entire rod to cool to a temperature of no more than 1◦ C?
18. Let a metallic rod 20 cm long be heated to a uniform temperature of 100◦ C. Suppose that
    at t = 0, the ends of the bar are plunged into an ice bath at 0◦ C and thereafter maintained
    at this temperature, but that no heat is allowed to escape through the lateral surface. Find
    an expression for the temperature at any point in the bar at any later time. Determine the
    temperature at the center of the bar at time t = 30 s if the bar is made (a) of silver, (b) of
    aluminum, (c) of cast iron.
19. For the rod of Problem 18, find the time that will elapse before the center of the bar cools
    to a temperature of 5◦ C if the bar is made (a) of silver, (b) of aluminum, (c) of cast iron.
20. In solving differential equations, the computations can almost always be simplified by the
    use of dimensionless variables.
    (a) Show that if the dimensionless variable ξ = x/L is introduced, the heat conduction
    equation becomes
                                ∂2 u    L2 ∂u
                                     = 2      ,      0 < ξ < 1,  t > 0.
                                ∂ξ 2    α ∂t
    (b) Since L2 /α2 has the units of time, it is convenient to use this quantity to define a di-
    mensionless time variable τ = (α2 /L2 )t. Then show that the heat conduction equation
                  reduces to
                                                ∂2 u     ∂u
                                                      =     ,      0 < ξ < 1,     τ > 0.
                                                ∂ξ 2     ∂τ
              21. Consider the equation
                                                         auxx − but + cu = 0,                               (i)
                  where a, b, and c are constants.
                  (a) Let u(x, t) = eδt w(x, t), where δ is constant, and find the corresponding partial
                  differential equation for w.
                  (b) If b  = 0, show that δ can be chosen so that the partial differential equation found in
                  part (a) has no term in w. Thus, by a change of dependent variable, it is possible to reduce
                  Eq. (i) to the heat conduction equation.
              22. The heat conduction equation in two space dimensions is
                                                          α2 (uxx + uyy ) = ut .
                  Assuming that u(x, y, t) = X (x)Y(y)T(t), find ordinary differential equations that are
                  satisfied by X (x), Y(y), and T(t).
              23. The heat conduction equation in two space dimensions may be expressed in terms of polar
                  coordinates as
                                                α2 [urr + (1/r)ur + (1/r 2 )uθθ ] = ut .
                  Assuming that u(r, θ, t) = R(r)(θ)T(t), find ordinary differential equations that are
                  satisfied by R(r), (θ), and T(t).
10.6 Other Heat Conduction Problems
              In Section 10.5 we considered the problem consisting of the heat conduction equation
                                           α2 uxx = ut ,         0 < x < L,       t > 0,                   (1)
              the boundary conditions
                                          u(0, t) = 0,          u(L, t) = 0,      t > 0,                   (2)
              and the initial condition
                                              u(x, 0) = f (x),          0 ≤ x ≤ L.                         (3)
              We found the solution to be
                                                        ∞
                                                                                  nπx
                                                             cn e−n π α t/L sin
                                                                    2 2 2  2
                                           u(x, t) =                                   ,                   (4)
                                                                                    L
                                                        n=1
              where the coefficients cn are the same as in the series
                                                              ∞
                                                                          nπx
                                                    f (x) =        cn sin       .                          (5)
                                                                           L
                                                              n=1
The series in Eq. (5) is just the Fourier sine series for f ; according to Section 10.4, its
coefficients are given by
                                           
                                      2 L               nπx
                                cn =          f (x) sin     dx.                         (6)
                                      L 0                L
Hence the solution of the heat conduction problem, Eqs. (1) to (3), is given by the
series in Eq. (4) with the coefficients computed from Eq. (6).
   We emphasize that, at this stage, the solution (4) must be regarded as a formal
solution; that is, we obtained it without rigorous justification of the limiting processes
involved. Such a justification is beyond the scope of this book. However, once the
series (4) has been obtained, it is possible to show that in 0 < x < L, t > 0, it con-
verges to a continuous function; that the derivatives uxx and ut can be computed
by differentiating the series (4) term by term; and that the heat conduction equa-
tion (1) is indeed satisfied. The argument relies heavily on the fact that each term
of the series (4) contains a negative exponential factor, and this results in relatively
rapid convergence of the series. A further argument establishes that the function u
given by Eq. (4) also satisfies the boundary and initial conditions; this completes the
justification of the formal solution.
   It is interesting to note that although f satisfies the conditions of the Fourier con-
vergence theorem (Theorem 10.3.1), it may have points of discontinuity. In this case
the initial temperature distribution u(x, 0) = f (x) is discontinuous at one or more
points. Nevertheless, the solution u(x, t) is continuous for arbitrarily small values of
t > 0. This illustrates the fact that heat conduction is a diffusive process that instantly
smooths out any discontinuities that may be present in the initial temperature dis-
tribution. Finally, since f is bounded, it follows from Eq. (6) that the coefficients cn
are also bounded. Consequently, the presence of the negative exponential factor in
each term of the series (4) guarantees that
                                         lim u(x, t) = 0                                (7)
                                       t→∞
for all x regardless of the initial condition. This is in accord with the result expected
from physical intuition.
   We now consider two other problems of one-dimensional heat conduction that can
be handled by the method developed in Section 10.5.
Nonhomogeneous Boundary Conditions. Suppose now that one end of the bar is held at a
constant temperature T1 and the other is maintained at a constant temperature T2 .
Then the boundary conditions are
                          u(0, t) = T1 ,      u(L, t) = T2 ,   t > 0.                   (8)
The differential equation (1) and the initial condition (3) remain unchanged.
   This problem is only slightly more difficult, because of the nonhomogeneous
boundary conditions, than the one in Section 10.5. We can solve it by reducing it
to a problem having homogeneous boundary conditions, which can then be solved
as in Section 10.5. The technique for doing this is suggested by the following physical
argument.
   After a long time—that is, as t → ∞—we anticipate that a steady temperature
distribution v(x) will be reached, which is independent of the time t and the initial
conditions. Since v(x) does not depend on t, its time derivative vt is zero; the heat
conduction equation (1) for v then becomes
                                v (x) = 0,     0 < x < L.                             (9)
Hence the steady state temperature distribution is a linear function of x. Further,
v(x) must satisfy the boundary conditions
                                v(0) = T1 ,      v(L) = T2 ,                           (10)
which are valid even as t → ∞. The solution of Eq. (9) satisfying Eqs. (10) is
                                                    x
                                 v(x) = (T2 − T1 ) + T1 .                              (11)
                                                    L
   Returning to the original problem, Eqs. (1), (3), and (8), we will try to express u(x, t)
as the sum of the steady state temperature distribution v(x) and another (transient)
temperature distribution w(x, t); thus we write
                                  u(x, t) = v(x) + w(x, t).                            (12)
Since v(x) is given by Eq. (11), the problem will be solved provided that we can
determine w(x, t). The boundary value problem for w(x, t) is found by substituting
the expression in Eq. (12) for u(x, t) in Eqs. (1), (3), and (8).
   From Eq. (1) we have
                                  α2 (v + w)xx = (v + w)t ;
it follows that
                                         α2 wxx = wt ,                                 (13)
since vxx = 0 and vt = 0. Similarly, from Eqs. (12), (8), and (10),
                         w(0, t) = u(0, t) − v(0) = T1 − T1 = 0,
                                                                                       (14)
                        w(L, t) = u(L, t) − v(L) = T2 − T2 = 0.
Finally, from Eqs. (12) and (3),
                         w(x, 0) = u(x, 0) − v(x) = f (x) − v(x),                      (15)
where v(x) is given by Eq. (11). Thus the transient part of the solution to the original
problem is found by solving the problem consisting of Eqs. (13), (14), and (15). This
latter problem is precisely the one solved in Section 10.5, provided that f (x) − v(x)
is now regarded as the initial temperature distribution. Hence
                                                 ∞
                                       x                                 nπx
                                                      cn e−n π α t/L sin
                                                            2 2 2   2
                u(x, t) = (T2 − T1 ) + T1 +                                  ,         (16)
                                       L                                  L
                                                 n=1
where                       L
                         2                          x              nπx
                  cn =           f (x) − (T2 − T1 )     − T1 sin         dx.           (17)
                         L  0                       L                 L
   This is another case in which a more difficult problem is solved by reducing it to a
simpler problem that has already been solved. The technique of reducing a problem
with nonhomogeneous boundary conditions to one with homogeneous boundary
conditions by subtracting the steady state solution has wide application.
        Consider the heat conduction problem
EXAMPLE
                                         uxx = ut ,     0 < x < 30,    t > 0,                          (18)
   1
                                     u(0, t) = 20,      u(30, t) = 50,    t > 0,                       (19)
                                     u(x, 0) = 60 − 2x,       0 < x < 30.                              (20)
        Find the steady state temperature distribution and the boundary value problem that
        determines the transient distribution.
           The steady state temperature satisfies v (x) = 0 and the boundary conditions v(0) = 20 and
        v(30) = 50. Thus v(x) = 20 + x. The transient distribution w(x, t) satisfies the heat conduction
        equation
                                                     wxx = wt ,                                        (21)
        the homogeneous boundary conditions
                                           w(0, t) = 0,     w(30, t) = 0,                              (22)
        and the modified initial condition
                                    w(x, 0) = 60 − 2x − (20 + x) = 40 − 3x.                            (23)
        Note that this problem is of the form (1), (2), (3) with f (x) = 40 − 3x, α2 = 1, and L = 30. Thus
        the solution is given by Eqs. (4) and (6).
           Figure 10.6.1 shows a plot of the initial temperature distribution 60 − 2x, the final temper-
        ature distribution 20 + x, and the temperature at three intermediate times found by solving
        Eqs. (21) through (23). Note that the intermediate temperature satisfies the boundary condi-
        tions (19) for any t > 0. As t increases, the effect of the boundary conditions gradually moves
        from the ends of the bar toward its center.
                             u
                           60
                                    t=0
                           50
                                                                 t→∞
                           40
                           30
                                                                  t = 30
                           20
                                                                         t = 10
                                                                                 t=2
                           10
                                       5       10       15       20        25      30   x
                         FIGURE 10.6.1 Temperature distributions at several times
                                for the heat conduction problem of Example 1.
        Bar with Insulated Ends. A slightly different problem occurs if the ends of the bar are
        insulated so that there is no passage of heat through them. According to Eq. (2) in
        Appendix A, the rate of flow of heat across a cross section is proportional to the rate
of change of temperature in the x direction. Thus, in the case of no heat flow, the
boundary conditions are
                         ux (0, t) = 0,       ux (L, t) = 0, t > 0.                  (24)
The problem posed by Eqs. (1), (3), and (24) can also be solved by the method of
separation of variables. If we let
                                     u(x, t) = X (x)T(t),                            (25)
and substitute for u in Eq. (1), then it follows, as in Section 10.5, that
                                     X         1 T
                                           = 2        = −λ,                          (26)
                                      X         α T
where λ is a constant. Thus we obtain again the two ordinary differential equations
                                         X  + λX = 0,                              (27)
                                        T  + α2 λT = 0.                             (28)
For any value of λ, a product of solutions of Eqs. (27) and (28) is a solution of the
partial differential equation (1). However, we are interested only in those solutions
that also satisfy the boundary conditions (24).
    If we substitute for u(x, t) from Eq. (25) in the boundary condition at x = 0, we
obtain X  (0)T(t) = 0. We cannot permit T(t) to be zero for all t, since then u(x, t)
would also be zero for all t. Hence we must have
                                            X  (0) = 0.                             (29)
Proceeding in the same way with the boundary condition at x = L, we find that
                                           X  (L) = 0.                              (30)
Thus we wish to solve Eq. (27) subject to the boundary conditions (29) and (30). It
is possible to show that nontrivial solutions of this problem can exist only if λ is real.
One way to show this is indicated in Problem 18; alternatively, we can appeal to a
more general theory to be discussed in Section 11.2. We will assume that λ is real and
will consider in turn the three cases λ < 0, λ = 0, and λ > 0.
    If λ < 0, we let λ = −μ2 , where μ is real and positive, so that Eq. (27) becomes
   
X − μ2 X = 0. It is convenient to write its general solution as
                              X (x) = k1 sinh μx + k2 cosh μx                        (31)
so that the boundary conditions are easier to apply. In this case the boundary con-
ditions can be satisfied only by choosing k1 = k2 = 0. Since this is unacceptable, it
follows that λ cannot be negative; in other words, the problem (27), (29), (30) has no
negative eigenvalues.
    If λ = 0, then Eq. (27) is X  = 0, and therefore,
                                      X (x) = k1 x + k2 .                            (32)
The boundary conditions (29) and (30) require that k1 = 0 but do not determine k2 .
Thus λ = 0 is an eigenvalue, corresponding to the eigenfunction X (x) = 1. For λ = 0,
it follows from Eq. (28) that T(t) is also a constant, which can be combined with k2 .
Hence, for λ = 0, we obtain the constant solution u(x, t) = k2 .
    Finally, if λ > 0, let λ = μ2 , where μ is real and positive. Then Eq. (27) becomes
   
X + μ2 X = 0, and consequently,
                                  X (x) = k1 sin μx + k2 cos μx.                            (33)
The boundary condition (29) requires that k1 = 0, and the boundary condition (30)
requires that μ = nπ/L for n = 1, 2, 3, . . . but leaves k2 arbitrary. Thus the problem
(27), (29), (30) has an infinite sequence of positive eigenvalues λ = n2 π2 /L2 with the
corresponding eigenfunctions X (x) = cos(nπx/L). For these values of λ,the solutions
T(t) of Eq. (28) are proportional to exp(−n2 π2 α2 t/L2 ).
    Combining all these results, we have the following fundamental solutions for the
problem (1), (3), and (24):
                      u0 (x, t) = 1,
                                                                                            (34)
                                                        nπx
                      un (x, t) = e−n π α t/L cos
                                        2 2 2   2
                                                             ,      n = 1, 2, . . . ,
                                                         L
where arbitrary constants of proportionality have been dropped. Each of these func-
tions satisfies the differential equation (1) and the boundary conditions (24). Because
both the differential equation and the boundary conditions are linear and homoge-
neous, any finite linear combination of the fundamental solutions satisfies them. We
will assume that this is true for convergent infinite linear combinations of fundamen-
tal solutions as well. Thus, to satisfy the initial condition (3), we assume that u(x, t)
has the form
                                                        ∞
                                       c0
                          u(x, t) =       u0 (x, t) +       cn un (x, t)
                                        2               n=1
                                               ∞
                                       c0  −n2 π2 α2 t/L2               nπx
                                   =       +       cn e             cos      .              (35)
                                        2                                 L
                                              n=1
The coefficients cn are determined by the requirement that
                                                  ∞
                                          c0                  nπx
                            u(x, 0) =         +      cn cos         = f (x).                (36)
                                          2                     L
                                                n=1
Thus the unknown coefficients in Eq. (35) must be the coefficients in the Fourier
cosine series of period 2L for f . Hence
                                
                             2 L                nπx
                      cn =           f (x) cos         dx,       n = 0, 1, 2, . . . .       (37)
                             L 0                  L
With this choice of the coefficients c0 , c1 , c2 , . . . , the series (35) provides the solution
to the heat conduction problem for a rod with insulated ends, Eqs. (1), (3), and (24).
    It is worth observing that the solution (35) can also be thought of as the sum
of a steady state temperature distribution (given by the constant c0 /2), which is
independent of time t, and a transient distribution (given by the rest of the infinite
series) that approaches zero in the limit as t approaches infinity. That the steady state
is a constant is consistent with the expectation that the process of heat conduction
will gradually smooth out the initial temperature distribution in the bar as long as no
        heat is allowed to enter from, or to escape to, the outside. The physical interpretation
        of the term                                           
                                                  c0      1 L
                                                      =              f (x) dx                         (38)
                                                  2       L 0
        is that it is the mean value of the original temperature distribution.
        Find the temperature u(x, t) in a metal rod of length 25 cm that is insulated on the ends as well
EXAMPLE as on the sides and whose initial temperature distribution is u(x, 0) = x for 0 < x < 25.
   2       The temperature in the rod satisfies the heat conduction problem (1), (3), (24) with L = 25.
        Thus, from Eq. (35), the solution is
                                                 c0  −n2 π2 α2 t/625
                                                         ∞
                                                                                     nπx
                                      u(x, t) =      +       cn e               cos      ,            (39)
                                                  2     n=1
                                                                                      25
        where the coefficients are determined from Eq. (37). We have
                                                             25
                                                        2
                                                 c0 =              x dx = 25                          (40)
                                                        25 0
        and, for n ≥ 1,
                                        25
                                    2               nπx
                             cn =            x cos       dx
                                    25   0           25
                                                                    
                                                                      −100/(nπ)2 ,      n odd;
                                = 50(cos nπ − 1)/(nπ) =      2
                                                                                                      (41)
                                                                        0,              n even.
        Thus
                                         25 100         ∞
                                                                  1 −n2 π2 α2 t/625
                              u(x, t) =      − 2                     e              cos(nπx/25)       (42)
                                           2     π                n2
                                                      n=1,3,5,...
        is the solution of the given problem.
            For α2 = 1, Figure 10.6.2 shows plots of the temperature distribution in the bar at several
        times. Again, the convergence of the series is rapid so that only a relatively few terms are
        needed to generate the graphs.
                          u
                         25                                                         t=0
                                                                                            t = 10
                         20
                                                                                            t = 40
                         15                                                                 t = 100
                                                                                            t→∞
                         10
                           5
                                        5           10             15           20         25       x
                          FIGURE 10.6.2 Temperature distributions at several times
                                 for the heat conduction problem of Example 2.
         More General Problems. The method of separation of variables can also be used to
         solve heat conduction problems with boundary conditions other than those given
         by Eqs. (8) and Eqs. (24). For example, the left end of the bar might be held at a fixed
         temperature T while the other end is insulated. In this case the boundary conditions
         are
                                         u(0, t) = T,       ux (L, t) = 0,     t > 0.                       (43)
         The first step in solving this problem is to reduce the given boundary conditions to
         homogeneous ones by subtracting the steady state solution. The resulting problem
         is solved by essentially the same procedure as in the problems previously consid-
         ered. However, the extension of the initial function f outside of the interval [0, L] is
         somewhat different from that in any case considered so far (see Problem 15).
            A more general type of boundary condition occurs when the rate of heat flow
         through the end of the bar is proportional to the temperature. It is shown in
         Appendix A that the boundary conditions in this case are of the form
                          ux (0, t) − h1 u(0, t) = 0,       ux (L, t) + h2 u(L, t) = 0,        t > 0,       (44)
         where h1 and h2 are nonnegative constants. If we apply the method of separation of
         variables to the problem consisting of Eqs. (1), (3), and (44), we find that X (x) must
         be a solution of
                      X  + λX = 0,          X  (0) − h1 X (0) = 0,         X  (L) + h2 X (L) = 0,       (45)
         where λ is the separation constant. Once again it is possible to show that nontrivial
         solutions can exist only for certain nonnegative real values of λ, the eigenvalues, but
         these values are not given by a simple formula (see Problem 20). It is also possible
         to show that the corresponding solutions of Eqs. (45), the eigenfunctions, satisfy an
         orthogonality relation and that we can satisfy the initial condition (3) by superposing
         solutions of Eqs. (45). However, the resulting series is not included in the discussion
         of this chapter. There is a more general theory that covers such problems, and it is
         outlined in Chapter 11.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 8, find the steady state solution of the heat conduction equation
         α2 uxx = ut that satisfies the given set of boundary conditions.
           1. u(0, t) = 10,     u(50, t) = 40                   2. u(0, t) = 30,    u(40, t) = −20
           3. ux (0, t) = 0,    u(L, t) = 0                     4. ux (0, t) = 0,   u(L, t) = T
           5. u(0, t) = 0,     ux (L, t) = 0                    6. u(0, t) = T,     ux (L, t) = 0
           7. ux (0, t) − u(0, t) = 0,    u(L, t) = T           8. u(0, t) = T,     ux (L, t) + u(L, t) = 0
           9. Let an aluminum rod of length 20 cm be initially at the uniform temperature of 25◦ C.
              Suppose that at time t = 0, the end x = 0 is cooled to 0◦ C while the end x = 20 is heated
              to 60◦ C, and both are thereafter maintained at those temperatures.
              (a) Find the temperature distribution in the rod at any time t.
    (b) Plot the initial temperature distribution, the final (steady state) temperature distribu-
    tion, and the temperature distributions at two representative intermediate times on the
    same set of axes.
    (c) Plot u versus t for x = 5, 10, and 15.
    (d) Determine how much time must elapse before the temperature at x = 5 cm comes
    (and remains) within 1% of its steady state value.
10. (a) Let the ends of a copper rod 100 cm long be maintained at 0◦ C. Suppose that the
    center of the bar is heated to 100◦ C by an external heat source and that this situation is
    maintained until a steady state results. Find this steady state temperature distribution.
    (b) At a time t = 0 [after the steady state of part (a) has been reached], let the heat source
    be removed. At the same instant let the end x = 0 be placed in thermal contact with a
    reservoir at 20◦ C, while the other end remains at 0◦ C. Find the temperature as a function
    of position and time.
    (c) Plot u versus x for several values of t. Also plot u versus t for several values of x.
    (d) What limiting value does the temperature at the center of the rod approach after a
    long time? How much time must elapse before the center of the rod cools to within 1◦ C
    of its limiting value?
11. Consider a rod of length 30 for which α2 = 1. Suppose the initial temperature distribution
    is given by u(x, 0) = x(60 − x)/30 and that the boundary conditions are u(0, t) = 30 and
    u(30, t) = 0.
    (a) Find the temperature in the rod as a function of position and time.
    (b) Plot u versus x for several values of t. Also plot u versus t for several values of x.
    (c) Plot u versus t for x = 12. Observe that u initially decreases, then increases for a
    while, and finally decreases to approach its steady state value. Explain physically why this
    behavior occurs at this point.
12. Consider a uniform rod of length L with an initial temperature given by
    u(x, 0) = sin(πx/L), 0 ≤ x ≤ L. Assume that both ends of the bar are insulated.
    (a) Find the temperature u(x, t).
    (b) What is the steady state temperature as t → ∞?
    (c) Let α2 = 1 and L = 40. Plot u versus x for several values of t. Also plot u versus t for
    several values of x.
    (d) Describe briefly how the temperature in the rod changes as time progresses.
13. Consider a bar of length 40 cm whose initial temperature is given by u(x, 0) = x(60 − x)/30.
    Suppose that α2 = 1/4 cm2 /s and that both ends of the bar are insulated.
    (a) Find the temperature u(x, t).
    (b) Plot u versus x for several values of t. Also plot u versus t for several values of x.
    (c) Determine the steady state temperature in the bar.
    (d) Determine how much time must elapse before the temperature at x = 40 comes within
    1◦ C of its steady state value.
14. Consider a bar 30 cm long that is made of a material for which α2 = 1 and whose ends are
    insulated. Suppose that the initial temperature is zero except for the interval 5 < x < 10,
    where the initial temperature is 25◦ C.
    (a) Find the temperature u(x, t).
    (b) Plot u versus x for several values of t. Also plot u versus t for several values of x.
    (c) Plot u(4, t) and u(11, t) versus t. Observe that the points x = 4 and x = 11 are symmet-
    rically located with respect to the initial temperature pulse, yet their temperature plots
    are significantly different. Explain physically why this is so.
15. Consider a uniform bar of length L having an initial temperature distribution given by
    f (x), 0 ≤ x ≤ L. Assume that the temperature at the end x = 0 is held at 0◦ C, while the
    end x = L is insulated so that no heat passes through it.
    (a) Show that the fundamental solutions of the partial differential equation and boundary
    conditions are
                                      2 2 2    2
                  un (x, t) = e−(2n−1) π α t/4L sin[(2n − 1)πx/2L],            n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
    (b) Find a formal series expansion for the temperature u(x, t)
                                                       ∞
                                            u(x, t) =      cn un (x, t)
                                                       n=1
    that also satisfies the initial condition u(x, 0) = f (x).
    Hint: Even though the fundamental solutions involve only the odd sines, it is still possi-
    ble to represent f by a Fourier series involving only these functions. See Problem 39 of
    Section 10.4.
16. In the bar of Problem 15, suppose that L = 30, α2 = 1, and the initial temperature distri-
    bution is f (x) = 30 − x for 0 < x < 30.
    (a) Find the temperature u(x, t).
    (b) Plot u versus x for several values of t. Also plot u versus t for several values of x.
    (c) How does the location xm of the warmest point in the bar change as t increases? Draw
    a graph of xm versus t.
    (d) Plot the maximum temperature in the bar versus t.
17. Suppose that the conditions are as in Problems 15 and 16 except that the boundary
    condition at x = 0 is u(0, t) = 40.
    (a) Find the temperature u(x, t).
    (b) Plot u versus x for several values of t. Also plot u versus t for several values of x.
    (c) Compare the plots you obtained in this problem with those from Problem 16. Explain
    how the change in the boundary condition at x = 0 causes the observed differences in the
    behavior of the temperature in the bar.
18. Consider the problem
                              X  + λX = 0,        X  (0) = 0,        X  (L) = 0.                (i)
    Let λ = μ2 , where μ = ν + iσ with ν and σ real. Show that if σ  = 0, then the only solution
    of Eqs. (i) is the trivial solution X (x) = 0.
    Hint: Use an argument similar to that in Problem 23 of Section 10.1.
19. The right end of a bar of length a with thermal conductivity κ1 and cross-sectional area A1
    is joined to the left end of a bar of thermal conductivity κ2 and cross-sectional area A2 .
    The composite bar has a total length L. Suppose that the end x = 0 is held at temperature
    zero, while the end x = L is held at temperature T. Find the steady state temperature in
    the composite bar, assuming that the temperature and rate of heat flow are continuous at
    x = a.
    Hint: See Eq. (2) of Appendix A.
20. Consider the problem
                                                    α2 uxx = ut ,       0 < x < L,      t > 0;
                  u(0, t) = 0,       ux (L, t) + γu(L, t) = 0,          t > 0;                      (i)
                                                u(x, 0) = f (x),        0 ≤ x ≤ L.
    (a) Let u(x, t) = X (x)T(t), and show that
                       X  + λX = 0,        X (0) = 0,       X  (L) + γX (L) = 0,                   (ii)
    and
                                             T  + λα2 T = 0,
    where λ is the separation constant.
    (b) Assume that λ is real, and show that problem (ii) has no nontrivial solutions if λ ≤ 0.
    (c) If λ > 0, let λ = μ2 with μ > 0. Show that problem (ii) has nontrivial solutions only if
    μ is a solution of the equation
                                        μ cos μL + γ sin μL = 0.                                     (iii)
    (d) Rewrite Eq. (iii) as tan μL = −μ/γ. Then, by drawing the graphs of y = tan μL and
    y = −μL/γL for μ > 0 on the same set of axes, show that Eq. (iii) is satisfied by infinitely
    many positive values of μ; denote these by μ1 , μ2 , . . . , μn , . . . , ordered in increasing size.
    (e) Determine the set of fundamental solutions un (x, t) corresponding to the values μn
    found in part (d).
An External Heat Source. Consider the heat conduction problem in a bar that is in thermal
contact with an external heat source or sink. Then the modified heat conduction equation is
                                          ut = α2 uxx + s(x),                                          (i)
where the term s(x) describes the effect of the external agency; s(x) is positive for a source and
negative for a sink. Suppose that the boundary conditions are
                                   u(0, t) = T1 ,     u(L, t) = T2                                    (ii)
and the initial condition is
                                            u(x, 0) = f (x).                                         (iii)
Problems 21 through 23 deal with this kind of problem.
21. Write u(x, t) = v(x) + w(x, t), where v and w are the steady state and transient parts of the
    solution, respectively. State the boundary value problems that v(x) and w(x, t), respectively,
    satisfy. Observe that the problem for w is the fundamental heat conduction problem
    discussed in Section 10.5, with a modified initial temperature distribution.
22. (a) Suppose that α2 = 1 and s(x) = k, a constant, in Eq. (i). Find v(x).
    (b) Assume that T1 = 0, T2 = 0, L = 20, k = 1/5, and that f (x) = 0 for 0 < x < L. Deter-
    mine w(x, t). Then plot u(x, t) versus x for several values of t; on the same axes, also plot
    the steady state part of the solution v(x).
23. (a) Let α2 = 1 and s(x) = kx/L, where k is a constant, in Eq. (i). Find v(x).
    (b) Assume that T1 = 10, T2 = 30, L = 20, k = 1/2, and that f (x) = 0 for 0 < x < L.
    Determine w(x, t). Then plot u(x, t) versus x for several values of t; on the same axes,
    also plot the steady state part of the solution v(x).
10.7 The Wave Equation: Vibrations of an Elastic String
              A second partial differential equation that occurs frequently in applied mathematics
              is the wave10 equation. Some form of this equation, or a generalization of it, almost
              inevitably arises in any mathematical analysis of phenomena involving the propaga-
              tion of waves in a continuous medium. For example, the studies of acoustic waves,
              water waves, electromagnetic waves, and seismic waves are all based on this equation.
                 Perhaps the easiest situation to visualize occurs in the investigation of mechanical
              vibrations. Suppose that an elastic string of length L is tightly stretched between two
              supports at the same horizontal level, so that the x-axis lies along the string (see
              Figure 10.7.1).
                                                                                                    x
                                                  u(x, t)
                                        x=0                                              x=L
                                               FIGURE 10.7.1 A vibrating string.
                 The elastic string may be thought of as a guitar string, a guy wire, or possibly an
              electric power line. Suppose that the string is set in motion (by plucking, for example)
              so that it vibrates in a vertical plane, and let u(x, t) denote the vertical displacement
              experienced by the string at the point x at time t. If damping effects, such as air
              resistance, are neglected, and if the amplitude of the motion is not too large, then
              u(x, t) satisfies the partial differential equation
                                                             a2 uxx = utt                                            (1)
              in the domain 0 < x < L, t > 0. Equation (1) is known as the one-dimensional wave
              equation and is derived in Appendix B at the end of the chapter. The constant
              coefficient a2 appearing in Eq. (1) is given by
                                                             a2 = T/ρ,                                               (2)
              where T is the tension (force) in the string, and ρ is the mass per unit length of the
              string material. It follows that a has the units of length/time—that is, of velocity. In
              Problem 14 it is shown that a is the velocity of propagation of waves along the string.
              10The solution of the wave equation was one of the major mathematical problems of the mid-eighteenth
              century. The wave equation was first derived and studied by D’Alembert in 1746. It also attracted the
              attention of Euler (1748), Daniel Bernoulli (1753), and Lagrange (1759). Solutions were obtained in
              several different forms, and the merits of, and relations among, these solutions were argued, sometimes
              heatedly, in a series of papers extending over more than 25 years. The major points at issue concerned
              the nature of a function and the kinds of functions that can be represented by trigonometric series. These
              questions were not resolved until the nineteenth century.
   To describe the motion of the string completely, it is necessary also to specify
suitable initial and boundary conditions for the displacement u(x, t). The ends are
assumed to remain fixed, and therefore the boundary conditions are
                          u(0, t) = 0,        u(L, t) = 0,       t ≥ 0.               (3)
Since the differential equation (1) is of second order with respect to t, it is plausible
to prescribe two initial conditions. These are the initial position of the string
                                u(x, 0) = f (x),         0≤x≤L                        (4)
and its initial velocity
                               ut (x, 0) = g(x),         0 ≤ x ≤ L,                   (5)
where f and g are given functions. In order for Eqs. (3), (4), and (5) to be consistent,
it is also necessary to require that
                         f (0) = f (L) = 0,           g(0) = g(L) = 0.                (6)
   The mathematical problem then is to determine the solution of the wave equation
(1) that also satisfies the boundary conditions (3) and the initial conditions (4) and
(5). Like the heat conduction problem of Sections 10.5 and 10.6, this problem is an
initial value problem in the time variable t and a boundary value problem in the space
variable x. Alternatively, it can be considered as a boundary value problem in the
semi-infinite strip 0 < x < L, t > 0 of the xt-plane (see Figure 10.7.2). One condition
is imposed at each point on the semi-infinite sides, and two are imposed at each point
on the finite base.
                                   t
                                                            x=L
                         u(0, t) = 0        a 2u xx = u tt     u(L, t) = 0
                                          u(x, 0) = f (x)                x
                                          u t(x, 0) = g(x)
              FIGURE 10.7.2      Boundary value problem for the wave equation.
   It is important to realize that Eq. (1) governs a large number of other wave prob-
lems besides the transverse vibrations of an elastic string. For example, it is only
necessary to interpret the function u and the constant a appropriately to have prob-
lems dealing with water waves in an ocean, acoustic or electromagnetic waves in
the atmosphere, or elastic waves in a solid body. If more than one space dimension
is significant, then Eq. (1) must be slightly generalized. The two-dimensional wave
equation is
                                      a2 (uxx + uyy ) = utt .                             (7)
This equation would arise, for example, if we considered the motion of a thin elastic
sheet, such as a drumhead. Similarly, in three dimensions the wave equation is
                                  a2 (uxx + uyy + uzz ) = utt .                           (8)
In connection with the latter two equations, the boundary and initial conditions must
also be suitably generalized.
   We now solve three boundary value problems involving the wave equation in one
dimension.
Elastic String with Nonzero Initial Displacement. First suppose that the string is disturbed
from its equilibrium position and then released at time t = 0 with zero veloc-
ity to vibrate freely. Then the vertical displacement u(x, t) must satisfy the wave
equation (1)
                           a2 uxx = utt ,         0 < x < L,   t > 0;
the boundary conditions (3)
                          u(0, t) = 0,          u(L, t) = 0,      t ≥ 0;
and the initial conditions
                     u(x, 0) = f (x),         ut (x, 0) = 0,     0 ≤ x ≤ L,               (9)
where f is a given function describing the configuration of the string at t = 0.
   The method of separation of variables can be used to obtain the solution of Eqs. (1),
(3), and (9). Assuming that
                                      u(x, t) = X (x)T(t)                                (10)
and substituting for u in Eq. (1), we obtain
                                      X        1 T 
                                             = 2        = −λ,                            (11)
                                      X         a T
where λ is a separation constant. Thus we find that X (x) and T(t) satisfy the ordinary
differential equations
                                           X  + λX = 0,                                (12)
                                           
                                       T + a λT = 0.
                                                  2
                                                                                         (13)
Further, by substituting from Eq. (10) for u(x, t) in the boundary conditions (3), we
find that X (x) must satisfy the boundary conditions
                                  X (0) = 0,          X (L) = 0.                         (14)
Finally, by substituting from Eq. (10) into the second of the initial conditions (9), we
also find that T(t) must satisfy the initial condition
                                           T  (0) = 0.                              (15)
Our next task is to determine X (x), T(t), and λ by solving Eq. (12) subject to the
boundary conditions (14) and solving Eq. (13) subject to the initial condition (15).
   The problem of solving the differential equation (12) subject to the boundary
conditions (14) is precisely the same problem that arose in Section 10.5 in connection
with the heat conduction equation. Thus we can use the results obtained there and
at the end of Section 10.1: the problem (12), (14) has nontrivial solutions if and only
if λ is an eigenvalue
                               λ = n2 π2 /L2 ,        n = 1, 2, . . . ,              (16)
and X (x) is proportional to the corresponding eigenfunction sin(nπx/L).
   Using the values of λ given by Eq. (16) in Eq. (13), we obtain
                                             n2 π2 a2
                                     T  +           T = 0.                         (17)
                                                L2
Therefore,
                                               nπat            nπat
                             T(t) = k1 cos           + k2 sin           ,            (18)
                                                 L                L
where k1 and k2 are arbitrary constants. The initial condition (15) requires that k2 = 0,
so T(t) must be proportional to cos(nπat/L).
   Thus the functions
                                       nπx        nπat
                      un (x, t) = sin        cos        ,     n = 1, 2, . . .        (19)
                                         L          L
satisfy the partial differential equation (1), the boundary conditions (3), and the sec-
ond initial condition (9). These functions are the fundamental solutions for the given
problem.
   To satisfy the remaining (nonhomogeneous) initial condition (9), we will consider
a superposition of the fundamental solutions (19) with properly chosen coefficients.
Thus we assume that u(x, t) has the form
                               ∞                  ∞
                                                              nπx         nπat
                   u(x, t) =       cn un (x, t) =      cn sin         cos       ,    (20)
                                                                L          L
                               n=1                 n=1
where the constants cn remain to be chosen. The initial condition u(x, 0) = f (x)
requires that
                                          ∞
                                                      nπx
                              u(x, 0) =        cn sin       = f (x).                 (21)
                                                        L
                                          n=1
Consequently, the coefficients cn must be the coefficients in the Fourier sine series of
period 2L for f ; hence
                                
                             2 L               nπx
                      cn =          f (x) sin       dx,       n = 1, 2, . . . .      (22)
                            L 0                 L
        Thus the formal solution of the problem of Eqs. (1), (3), and (9) is given by Eq. (20)
        with the coefficients calculated from Eq. (22).
           For a fixed value of n, the expression sin(nπx/L) cos(nπat/L) in Eq. (19) is peri-
        odic in time t with the period 2L/na; it therefore represents a vibratory motion of the
        string having this period, or having the frequency nπa/L. The quantities nπa/L for
        n = 1, 2, . . . are the natural frequencies of the string—that is, the frequencies at which
        the string will freely vibrate. The factor sin(nπx/L) represents the displacement pat-
        tern occurring in the string when it is executing vibrations of the given frequency. Each
        displacement pattern is called a natural mode of vibration and is periodic in the space
        variable x; the spatial period 2L/n is called the wavelength of the mode of frequency
        nπa/L. Thus the eigenvalues n2 π2 /L2 of the problem (12), (14) are proportional to
        the squares of the natural frequencies, and the eigenfunctions sin(nπx/L) give the
        natural modes. The first three natural modes are sketched in Figure 10.7.3. The total
        motion of the string, given by the function u(x, t) of Eq. (20), is thus a combination of
        the natural modes of vibration and is also a periodic function of time with period 2L/a.
                     u                                u                                 u
                     1                                1                                 1
                                                                         L
                                       L x                                  x                     L x
                   –1                               –1                                 –1
                             (a)                               (b)                            (c)
            FIGURE 10.7.3         First three fundamental modes of vibration of an elastic string.
                                      (a) Frequency = πa/L, wavelength = 2L;
                                      (b) frequency = 2πa/L, wavelength = L;
                                    (c) frequency = 3πa/L, wavelength = 2L/3.
        Consider a vibrating string of length L = 30 that satisfies the wave equation
EXAMPLE
                                          4uxx = utt ,      0 < x < 30,       t > 0.                  (23)
   1
        Assume that the ends of the string are fixed and that the string is set in motion with no initial
        velocity from the initial position
                                                       
                                                         x/10,              0 ≤ x ≤ 10,
                                  u(x, 0) = f (x) =                                                   (24)
                                                         (30 − x)/20, 10 < x ≤ 30.
        Find the displacement u(x, t) of the string, and describe its motion through one period.
           The solution is given by Eq. (20) with a = 2 and L = 30; that is,
                                                       ∞
                                                                   nπx      2nπt
                                           u(x, t) =       cn sin       cos       ,                   (25)
                                                       n=1
                                                                    30        30
        where cn is calculated from Eq. (22). Substituting from Eq. (24) into Eq. (22), we obtain
                                        10                            30
                                    2        x      nπx            2       30 − x       nπx
                              cn =              sin        dx +                     sin     dx.       (26)
                                   30 0 10            30          30 10      20          30
By evaluating the integrals in Eq. (26), we find that
                                       9        nπ
                                cn =        sin     ,    n = 1, 2, . . . .                       (27)
                                     n2 π 2      3
The solution (25), (27) gives the displacement of the string at any point x at any time t. The
motion is periodic in time with period 30, so it is sufficient to analyze the solution for 0 ≤ t ≤ 30.
   The best way to visualize the solution is by a computer animation showing the dynamic
behavior of the vibrating string. Here we indicate the motion of the string in Figures 10.7.4,
10.7.5, and 10.7.6. Plots of u versus x for t = 0, 4, 7.5, 11, and 15 are shown in Figure 10.7.4.
Observe that the maximum initial displacement is positive and occurs at x = 10, while at
t = 15, a half-period later, the maximum displacement is negative and occurs at x = 20. The
string then retraces its motion and returns to its original configuration at t = 30. Figure 10.7.5
shows the behavior of the points x = 5, 10, 15, and 25 by plots of u versus t for these fixed
values of x. The plots confirm that the motion is indeed periodic with period 30 and illustrate
that each point remains motionless for a substantial part of each period. Figure 10.7.6 shows a
three-dimensional plot of u versus both x and t, from which the overall nature of the solution
is apparent. Of course, the curves in Figures 10.7.4 and 10.7.5 lie on the surface shown in
Figure 10.7.6.
               u
               1
             0.8             t=0
             0.6                          t=4
             0.4
             0.2                                          t = 7.5
                     2    4    6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30                   x
            –0.2
            –0.4
                                                              t = 11
            –0.6                                                           t = 15
            –0.8
              –1
     FIGURE 10.7.4       Plots of u versus x for fixed values of t for the string in Example 1.
               u
               1
                                x = 10
                                x = 15
             0.5
                                x = 25
                            10         20            30         40          50       60 t
                                                   x=5
           –0.5
              –1
   FIGURE 10.7.5      Plots of u versus t for x = 5, 10, 15, and 25 for the string in Example 1.
                                     u
                                          1
                                                 20
                                  5                     40
                                         –1                     60
                              10                                          80
                           15                                                   t
                        20
                     25
                  30
                   x
             FIGURE 10.7.6       Plot of u versus x and t for the string in Example 1.
Justification of the Solution. As in the heat conduction problem considered earlier,
Eq. (20) with the coefficients cn given by Eq. (22) is only a formal solution of
Eqs. (1), (3), and (9). To determine whether Eq. (20) actually represents the solution
of the given problem requires some further investigation. As in the heat conduction
problem, it is tempting to try to show this directly by substituting Eq. (20) for u(x, t) in
Eqs. (1), (3), and (9). However, upon formally computing uxx , for example, we obtain
                                         ∞
                                                   nπ 2     nπx        nπat
                        uxx (x, t) = −        cn        sin      cos        ;
                                                    L        L          L
                                         n=1
due to the presence of the n2 factor in the numerator, this series may not converge.
This would not necessarily mean that the series (20) for u(x, t) is incorrect, but only
that the series (20) cannot be used to calculate uxx and utt . A basic difference between
solutions of the wave equation and those of the heat conduction equation is that
the latter contain negative exponential terms that approach zero very rapidly with
increasing n, which ensures the convergence of the series solution and its derivatives.
In contrast, series solutions of the wave equation contain only oscillatory terms that
do not decay with increasing n.
  However, there is an alternative way to establish the validity of Eq. (20) indirectly.
At the same time, we will gain additional information about the structure of the
solution. First we will show that Eq. (20) is equivalent to
                                                                    
                               u(x, t) = 21 h(x − at) + h(x + at) ,                    (28)
where h is the function obtained by extending the initial data f into (−L, 0) as an
odd function, and to other values of x as a periodic function of period 2L. That is,
                                        
                                            f (x),      0 ≤ x ≤ L,
                               h(x) =                                                  (29)
                                          −f (−x), −L < x < 0;
                                        h(x + 2L) = h(x).
   To establish Eq. (28), note that h has the Fourier series
                                              ∞
                                                         nπx
                                    h(x) =        cn sin     ,                           (30)
                                                          L
                                              n=1
where cn is given by Eq. (22). Then, using the trigonometric identities for the sine of
a sum or difference, we obtain
                            ∞      
                                           nπx      nπat          nπx     nπat
               h(x − at) =       cn sin         cos       − cos       sin      ,
                            n=1
                                            L         L            L       L
                            ∞      
                                           nπx      nπat          nπx     nπat
               h(x + at) =       cn sin         cos       + cos       sin      ,
                                            L         L            L       L
                            n=1
and Eq. (28) follows immediately upon adding the last two equations. From Eq. (28)
we see that u(x, t) is continuous for 0 < x < L, t > 0, provided that h is continuous
on the interval (−∞, ∞). This requires f to be continuous on the original interval
[0, L]. Similarly, u is twice continuously differentiable with respect to either variable
in 0 < x < L, t > 0, provided that h is twice continuously differentiable on (−∞, ∞).
This requires f  and f  to be continuous on [0, L]. Furthermore, since h is the odd
extension of f  , we must also have f  (0) = f  (L) = 0. However, since h is the even
extension of f  , no further conditions are required on f  . Provided that these con-
ditions are met, uxx and utt can be computed from Eq. (28), and it is an elementary
exercise to show that these derivatives satisfy the wave equation. Some of the details
of the argument just indicated are given in Problems 19 and 20.
   If some of the continuity requirements stated in the last paragraph are not met,
then u is not differentiable at some points in the semi-infinite strip 0 < x < L, t > 0,
and thus is a solution of the wave equation only in a somewhat restricted sense.
An important physical consequence of this observation is that if there are any dis-
continuities present in the initial data f , then they will be preserved in the solution
u(x, t) for all time. In contrast, in heat conduction problems, initial discontinuities are
instantly smoothed out (Section 10.6). Suppose that the initial displacement f has
a jump discontinuity at x = x0 , 0 ≤ x0 ≤ L. Since h is a periodic extension of f , the
same discontinuity is present in h(ξ) at ξ = x0 + 2nL and at ξ = −x0 + 2nL, where
n is any integer. Thus h(x − at) is discontinuous when x − at = x0 + 2nL or when
x − at = −x0 + 2nL. For a fixed x in [0, L], the discontinuity that was originally at
x0 will reappear in h(x − at) at t = (x ± x0 − 2nL)/a. Similarly, h(x + at) is discon-
tinuous at the point x at t = (−x ± x0 + 2mL)/a, where m is any integer. If we refer
to Eq. (28), it then follows that the solution u(x, t) is also discontinuous at the given
point x at these values of t. Since the physical problem is posed for t > 0, only those
values of m and n that yield positive values of t are of interest.
Elastic String with Nonzero Initial Velocity. Let us modify the problem just considered by
supposing that the string is set in motion from its equilibrium position with a given
velocity. Then the vertical displacement u(x, t) must satisfy the wave equation (1)
                            a2 uxx = utt ,      0 < x < L,     t > 0;
the boundary conditions (3)
                           u(0, t) = 0,       u(L, t) = 0,       t ≥ 0;
and the initial conditions
                     u(x, 0) = 0,         ut (x, 0) = g(x),        0 ≤ x ≤ L,         (31)
where g(x) is the initial velocity at the point x of the string.
   The solution of this new problem can be obtained by following the procedure
described above for the problem (1), (3), and (9). Upon separating variables, we find
that the problem for X (x) is exactly the same as before. Thus, once again, λ = n2 π2 /L2
and X (x) is proportional to sin(nπx/L). The differential equation for T(t) is again
Eq. (17),
                                               n2 π2 a2
                                      T  +            T = 0,                        (17)
                                                 L2
but the associated initial condition is now
                                              T(0) = 0,                               (32)
corresponding to the first of the initial conditions (31).The general solution of Eq. (17)
is given by Eq. (18),
                                                nπat             nπat
                              T(t) = k1 cos            + k2 sin        ,              (18)
                                                  L                L
but now the initial condition (32) requires that k1 = 0. Therefore, T(t) is now pro-
portional to sin(nπat/L), and the fundamental solutions for the problem (1), (3), and
(31) are
                                      nπx        nπat
                     un (x, t) = sin         sin        ,      n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .   (33)
                                       L           L
Each of the functions un (x, t) satisfies the wave equation (1), the boundary conditions
(3),and the first of the initial conditions (31).The main consequence of using the initial
conditions (31) rather than (9) is that the time-dependent factor in un (x, t) involves
a sine rather than a cosine.
   To satisfy the remaining (nonhomogeneous) initial condition,we assume that u(x, t)
can be expressed as a linear combination of the fundamental solutions (33); that is,
                               ∞                    ∞
                                                                 nπx      nπat
                    u(x, t) =       kn un (x, t) =        kn sin      sin           . (34)
                                                                  L          L
                               n=1                   n=1
To determine the values of the coefficients kn , we differentiate Eq. (34) with respect
to t, set t = 0, and use the second initial condition (31); this gives the equation
                                        ∞
                                              nπa           nπx
                           ut (x, 0) =             kn sin        = g(x).              (35)
                                                L            L
                                        n=1
Hence the quantities (nπa/L)kn are the coefficients in the Fourier sine series of
period 2L for g. Therefore,
                                   
                    nπa         2 L                nπx
                         kn =           g(x) sin          dx,     n = 1, 2, . . . .   (36)
                     L          L 0                  L
Thus Eq. (34), with the coefficients given by Eq. (36), constitutes a formal solution
to the problem of Eqs. (1), (3), and (31). The validity of this formal solution can
be established by arguments similar to those previously outlined for the solution of
Eqs. (1), (3), and (9).
         General Problem for the Elastic String. Finally, we turn to the problem consisting of the
         wave equation (1), the boundary conditions (3), and the general initial conditions
         (4), (5):
                              u(x, 0) = f (x),        ut (x, 0) = g(x),      0 < x < L,                (37)
         where f (x) and g(x) are the given initial position and velocity, respectively, of the
         string. Although this problem can be solved by separating variables, as in the cases
         discussed previously, it is important to note that it can also be solved simply by adding
         together the two solutions that we obtained above. To show that this is true, let v(x, t)
         be the solution of the problem (1), (3), and (9), and let w(x, t) be the solution of the
         problem (1), (3), and (31). Thus v(x, t) is given by Eqs. (20) and (22), and w(x, t) is
         given by Eqs. (34) and (36). Now let u(x, t) = v(x, t) + w(x, t); what problem does
         u(x, t) satisfy? First, observe that
                           a2 uxx − utt = (a2 vxx − vtt ) + (a2 wxx − wtt ) = 0 + 0 = 0,               (38)
         so u(x, t) satisfies the wave equation (1). Next, we have
           u(0, t) = v(0, t) + w(0, t) = 0 + 0 = 0,             u(L, t) = v(L, t) + w(L, t) = 0 + 0 = 0,
                                                                                                       (39)
         so u(x, t) also satisfies the boundary conditions (3). Finally, we have
                                 u(x, 0) = v(x, 0) + w(x, 0) = f (x) + 0 = f (x)                       (40)
         and
                                ut (x, 0) = vt (x, 0) + wt (x, 0) = 0 + g(x) = g(x).                   (41)
         Thus u(x, t) satisfies the general initial conditions (37).
            We can restate the result we have just obtained in the following way. To solve the
         wave equation with the general initial conditions (37), you can solve instead the some-
         what simpler problems with the initial conditions (9) and (31), respectively, and then
         add together the two solutions. This is another use of the principle of superposition.
PROBLEMS Consider an elastic string of length L whose ends are held fixed. The string is set in motion
         with no initial velocity from an initial position u(x, 0) = f (x). In each of Problems 1 through 4,
         carry out the following steps. Let L = 10 and a = 1 in parts (b) through (d).
         (a) Find the displacement u(x, t) for the given initial position f (x).
         (b) Plot u(x, t) versus x for 0 ≤ x ≤ 10 and for several values of t between t = 0 and t = 20.
         (c) Plot u(x, t) versus t for 0 ≤ t ≤ 20 and for several values of x.
         (d) Construct an animation of the solution in time for at least one period.
         (e) Describe the motion of the string in a few sentences.
                     
                       2x/L,               0 ≤ x ≤ L/2,
          1. f (x) =
                       2(L − x)/L, L/2 < x ≤ L
                     ⎧
                     ⎪
                     ⎨4x/L,                 0 ≤ x ≤ L/4,
          2. f (x) = 1,                   L/4 < x < 3L/4,
                     ⎪
                     ⎩4(L − x)/L, 3L/4 ≤ x ≤ L
          3. f (x) = 8x(L − x)2 /L3
                     
                       1, L/2 − 1 < x < L/2 + 1 (L > 2),
          4. f (x) =
                       0, otherwise
Consider an elastic string of length L whose ends are held fixed. The string is set in motion
from its equilibrium position with an initial velocity ut (x, 0) = g(x). In each of Problems 5
through 8, carry out the following steps. Let L = 10 and a = 1 in parts (b) through (d).
(a) Find the displacement u(x, t) for the given g(x).
(b) Plot u(x, t) versus x for 0 ≤ x ≤ 10 and for several values of t between t = 0 and t = 20.
(c) Plot u(x, t) versus t for 0 ≤ t ≤ 20 and for several values of x.
(d) Construct an animation of the solution in time for at least one period.
(e) Describe the motion of the string in a few sentences.
              
                2x/L,              0 ≤ x ≤ L/2,
  5. g(x) =
                2(L − x)/L, L/2 < x ≤ L
              ⎧
              ⎪
              ⎨4x/L,                0 ≤ x ≤ L/4,
  6. g(x) = 1,                    L/4 < x < 3L/4,
              ⎪
              ⎩4(L − x)/L, 3L/4 ≤ x ≤ L
  7. g(x) = 8x(L − x)2 /L3
              
                1, L/2 − 1 < x < L/2 + 1          (L > 2),
  8. g(x) =
                0, otherwise
  9. If an elastic string is free at one end, the boundary condition to be satisfied there is that
     ux = 0. Find the displacement u(x, t) in an elastic string of length L, fixed at x = 0 and
     free at x = L, set in motion with no initial velocity from the initial position u(x, 0) = f (x),
     where f is a given function.
     Hint: Show that the fundamental solutions for this problem, satisfying all conditions
     except the nonhomogeneous initial condition, are
                                         un (x, t) = sin λn x cos λn at,
     where λn = (2n − 1)π/(2L), n = 1, 2, . . . . Compare this problem with Problem 15 of Sec-
     tion 10.6; pay particular attention to the extension of the initial data out of the original
     interval [0, L].
10. Consider an elastic string of length L. The end x = 0 is held fixed, while the end x = L
     is free; thus the boundary conditions are u(0, t) = 0 and ux (L, t) = 0. The string is set in
     motion with no initial velocity from the initial position u(x, 0) = f (x), where
                                    
                                      1,  L/2 − 1 < x < L/2 + 1          (L > 2),
                            f (x) =
                                      0,  otherwise.
     (a) Find the displacement u(x, t).
     (b) With L = 10 and a = 1, plot u versus x for 0 ≤ x ≤ 10 and for several values of t. Pay
     particular attention to values of t between 3 and 7. Observe how the initial disturbance is
     reflected at each end of the string.
     (c) With L = 10 and a = 1, plot u versus t for several values of x.
     (d) Construct an animation of the solution in time for at least one period.
     (e) Describe the motion of the string in a few sentences.
11. Suppose that the string in Problem 10 is started instead from the initial position
     f (x) = 8x(L − x)2 /L3 . Follow the instructions in Problem 10 for this new problem.
12. Dimensionless variables can be introduced into the wave equation a2 uxx = utt in the
    following manner:
    (a) Let s = x/L and show that the wave equation becomes
                                               a2 uss = L2 utt .
    (b) Show that L/a has the dimensions of time and thus can be used as the unit on the
    time scale. Thus, let τ = at/L and show that the wave equation then reduces to
                                                  uss = uττ .
Problems 13 and 14 indicate the form of the general solution of the wave equation and the
physical significance of the constant a.
13. (a) Show that the wave equation
                                                 a2 uxx = utt
    can be reduced to the form uξη = 0 by the change of variables ξ = x − at, η = x + at.
    (b) Show that u(x, t) can be written as
                                     u(x, t) = φ(x − at) + ψ(x + at),
    where φ and ψ are arbitrary functions.
14. (a) Plot the value of φ(x − at) for t = 0, 1/a, 2/a, and t0 /a if φ(s) = sin s. Note that for any
    t = 0, the graph of y = φ(x − at) is the same as that of y = φ(x) when t = 0, but displaced a
    distance at in the positive x direction. Thus a represents the velocity at which a disturbance
    moves along the string.
    (b) What is the interpretation of φ(x + at)?
15. A steel wire 5 ft in length is stretched by a tensile force of 50 lb. The wire has a weight per
    unit length of 0.026 lb/ft.
    (a) Find the velocity of propagation of transverse waves in the wire.
    (b) Find the natural frequencies of vibration.
    (c) If the tension in the wire is increased, how are the natural frequencies changed? Are
    the natural modes also changed?
16. Consider the wave equation
                                                 a2 uxx = utt
    in an infinite one-dimensional medium subject to the initial conditions
                          u(x, 0) = f (x),      ut (x, 0) = 0,    −∞ < x < ∞.
    (a) Using the form of the solution obtained in Problem 13, show that φ and ψ must satisfy
                                             φ(x) + ψ(x) = f (x),
                                          −φ (x) + ψ (x) = 0.
    (b) Solve the equations of part (a) for φ and ψ, and thereby show that
                                                                      
                                   u(x, t) = 21 f (x − at) + f (x + at) .
    This form of the solution was obtained by D’Alembert in 1746.
    Hint: Note that the equation ψ (x) = φ (x) is solved by choosing ψ(x) = φ(x) + c.
    (c) Let
                                                  
                                                     2,   −1 < x < 1,
                                       f (x) =
                                                     0,   otherwise.
    Show that
                                              
                                                 2,     −1 + at < x < 1 + at,
                               f (x − at) =
                                                 0,     otherwise.
    Also determine f (x + at).
    (d) Sketch the solution found in part (b) at t = 0, t = 1/2a, t = 1/a, and t = 2/a, obtain-
    ing the results shown in Figure 10.7.7. Observe that an initial displacement produces two
    waves moving in opposite directions away from the original location; each wave consists
    of one-half of the initial displacement.
                                               u
                                               2
                                                                 t=0
                                               1
                                    –1                        1         x
                                               u
                                               2
                                                                           1
                                                                      t = 2a
                                               1
                            – 32    –1   – 12            1
                                                              1    3           x
                                                         2         2
                                               u
                                               1                        t = a1
                      –2            –1                        1          2       x
                                               u
                                                                                   t = a2
                                               1
            –3        –2           –1                         1          2       3        x
FIGURE 10.7.7      Propagation of an initial disturbance in an infinite one-dimensional medium.
17. Consider the wave equation
                                                    a2 uxx = utt
    in an infinite one-dimensional medium subject to the initial conditions
                        u(x, 0) = 0,          ut (x, 0) = g(x),      −∞ < x < ∞.
    (a) Using the form of the solution obtained in Problem 13, show that
                                                φ(x) + ψ(x) = 0,
                                          −aφ (x) + aψ (x) = g(x).
    (b) Use the first equation of part (a) to show that ψ (x) = −φ (x). Then use the second
    equation to show that −2aφ (x) = g(x) and therefore that
                                                       x
                                                  1
                                     φ(x) = −             g(ξ) dξ + φ(x0 ),
                                                 2a x0
    where x0 is arbitrary. Finally, determine ψ(x).
    (c) Show that
                                                          x+at
                                                      1
                                         u(x, t) =               g(ξ) dξ.
                                                     2a    x−at
18. By combining the results of Problems 16 and 17, show that the solution of the problem
                                                   a2 uxx = utt ,
                         u(x, 0) = f (x),       ut (x, 0) = g(x),          −∞ < x < ∞
    is given by
                                                                             x+at
                                   1                                   1
                         u(x, t) =     f (x − at) + f (x + at) +                    g(ξ) dξ.
                                   2                                    2a    x−at
Problems 19 and 20 indicate how the formal solution (20), (22) of Eqs. (1), (3), and (9) can be
shown to constitute the actual solution of that problem.
                                                                                            
19. By using the trigonometric identity sin A cos B = 21 sin(A + B) + sin(A − B) , show that
    the solution (20) of the problem of Eqs. (1), (3), and (9) can be written in the form (28).
20. Let h(ξ) represent the initial displacement in [0, L], extended into (−L, 0) as an odd func-
    tion and extended elsewhere as a periodic function of period 2L. Assuming that h, h , and
    h are continuous, show by direct differentiation that u(x, t) as given in Eq. (28) satisfies the
    wave equation (1) and also the initial conditions (9). Note also that since Eq. (20) clearly
    satisfies the boundary conditions (3), the same is true of Eq. (28). Comparing Eq. (28)
    with the solution of the corresponding problem for the infinite string (Problem 16), we see
    that they have the same form, provided that the initial data for the finite string, defined
    originally only on the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ L, are extended in the given manner over the entire
    x-axis. If this is done, the solution for the infinite string is also applicable to the finite one.
21. The motion of a circular elastic membrane, such as a drumhead, is governed by the two-
    dimensional wave equation in polar coordinates
                                    urr + (1/r)ur + (1/r 2 )uθθ = a−2 utt .
    Assuming that u(r, θ, t) = R(r)(θ)T(t), find ordinary differential equations satisfied by
    R(r), (θ), and T(t).
22. The total energy E(t) of the vibrating string is given as a function of time by
                                           L                                 
                                 E(t) =         1
                                                2
                                                  ρu2t (x, t) + 21 Tu2x (x, t)   dx;               (i)
                                            0
    the first term is the kinetic energy due to the motion of the string, and the second term is
    the potential energy created by the displacement of the string away from its equilibrium
    position.
       For the displacement u(x, t) given by Eq. (20)—that is, for the solution of the string
    problem with zero initial velocity—show that
                                                     π2 T  2 2
                                                             ∞
                                           E(t) =                n cn .                     (ii)
                                                       4L n=1
    Note that the right side of Eq. (ii) does not depend on t. Thus the total energy E is a
    constant and therefore is conserved during the motion of the string.
    Hint: Use Parseval’s equation (Problem 37 of Section 10.4 and Problem 17 of Section 10.3),
    and recall that a2 = T/ρ.
23. Dispersive Waves. Consider the modified wave equation
                              a−2 utt + γ 2 u = uxx ,        0 < x < L,       t>0            (i)
    with the boundary conditions
                                u(0, t) = 0,          u(L, t) = 0,         t>0              (ii)
    and the initial conditions
                           u(x, 0) = f (x),         ut (x, 0) = 0,        0 < x < L.       (iii)
    (a) Show that the solution can be written as
                                                                       
                                       ∞
                                                         n2 π2                  nπx
                           u(x, t) =        cn cos              + γ 2 at    sin     ,
                                       n=1
                                                           L2                    L
    where
                                                  L
                                               2                 nπx
                                       cn =            f (x) sin        dx.
                                              L    0              L
    (b) By using trigonometric identities, rewrite the solution as
                                  1                                                   
                                      ∞
                                                  nπ                      nπ
                       u(x, t) =         cn sin        (x + an t) + sin       (x − an t) .
                                  2 n=1            L                       L
    Determine an , the speed of wave propagation.
    (c) Observe that an , found in part (b), depends on n. This means that components of
    different wave lengths (or frequencies) are propagated at different speeds, resulting in a
    distortion of the original wave form over time. This phenomenon is called dispersion. Find
    the condition under which an is independent of n—that is, there is no dispersion.
24. Consider the situation in Problem 23 with a2 = 1, L = 10, and
                                               ⎧
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎨x − 4, 4 ≤ x ≤ 5,
                                      f (x) = 6 − x, 5 ≤ x ≤ 6,
                                               ⎪
                                               ⎩0,           otherwise.
    (a) Determine the coefficients cn in the solution of Problem 23(a).
                    (b) Plot
                                                    N
                                                               nπx
                                                        cn sin        for   0 ≤ x ≤ 10,
                                                    n=1
                                                                10
                    choosing N large enough so that the plot accurately displays the graph of f (x). Use this
                    value of N for the remaining plots called for in this problem.
                    (c) Let γ = 0. Plot u(x, t) versus x for t = 60.
                    (d) Let γ = 1/8. Plot u(x, t) versus x for t = 20, 40, and 60.
                    (e) Let γ = 1/4. Plot u(x, t) versus x for t = 20, 40, and 60.
10.8 Laplace’s Equation
               One of the most important of all partial differential equations occurring in applied
               mathematics is that associated with the name of Laplace11 : in two dimensions
                                                            uxx + uyy = 0,                                           (1)
               and in three dimensions
                                                        uxx + uyy + uzz = 0.                                         (2)
               For example, in a two-dimensional heat conduction problem, the temperature
               u(x, y, t) must satisfy the differential equation
                                                        α2 (uxx + uyy ) = ut ,                                       (3)
               where α2 is the thermal diffusivity. If a steady state exists, u is a function of x and y only,
               and the time derivative vanishes; in this case Eq. (3) reduces to Eq. (1). Similarly, for
               the steady state heat conduction problem in three dimensions, the temperature must
               satisfy the three-dimensional form of Laplace’s equation. Equations (1) and (2) also
               occur in other branches of mathematical physics. In the consideration of electrostatic
               fields, the electric potential function in a dielectric medium containing no electric
               charges must satisfy either Eq. (1) or Eq. (2), depending on the number of space
               dimensions involved. Similarly, the potential function of a particle in free space acted
               on only by gravitational forces satisfies the same equations. Consequently, Laplace’s
               equation is often referred to as the potential equation. Another example arises in
               the study of the steady (time-independent), two-dimensional, inviscid, irrotational
               motion of an incompressible fluid. This study centers on two functions, known as the
               velocity potential function and the stream function, both of which satisfy Eq. (1).
               In elasticity, the displacements that occur when a perfectly elastic bar is twisted are
               described in terms of the so-called warping function, which also satisfies Eq. (1).
               11 Laplace’s equation is named for Pierre-Simon de Laplace, who, beginning in 1782, studied its solutions
               extensively while investigating the gravitational attraction of arbitrary bodies in space. However, the
               equation first appeared in 1752 in a paper by Euler on hydrodynamics.
    Since there is no time dependence in any of the problems just mentioned, there
are no initial conditions to be satisfied by the solutions of Eq. (1) or (2). They must,
however, satisfy certain boundary conditions on the bounding curve or surface of the
region in which the differential equation is to be solved. Since Laplace’s equation
is of second order, it might be plausible to expect that two boundary conditions
would be required to determine the solution completely. This, however, is not the
case. Recall that in the heat conduction problem for the finite bar (Sections 10.5
and 10.6), it was necessary to prescribe one condition at each end of the bar—that
is, one condition at each point of the boundary. If we generalize this observation
to multidimensional problems, it is then natural to prescribe one condition on the
function u at each point on the boundary of the region in which a solution of Eq. (1)
or (2) is sought. The most common boundary condition occurs when the value of u
is specified at each boundary point; in terms of the heat conduction problem, this
corresponds to prescribing the temperature on the boundary. In some problems the
value of the derivative, or rate of change, of u in the direction normal to the boundary
is specified instead; the condition on the boundary of a thermally insulated body,
for example, is of this type. It is entirely possible for more complicated boundary
conditions to occur; for example, u might be prescribed on part of the boundary and
its normal derivative specified on the remainder. The problem of finding a solution
of Laplace’s equation that takes on given boundary values is known as a Dirichlet
problem, in honor of P. G. L. Dirichlet.12 On the other hand, if the values of the normal
derivative are prescribed on the boundary, the problem is said to be a Neumann
problem, in honor of C. G. Neumann.13 The Dirichlet and Neumann problems are
also known as the first and second boundary value problems of potential theory,
respectively.
    Physically, it is plausible to expect that the types of boundary conditions just
mentioned will be sufficient to determine the solution completely. Indeed, it is pos-
sible to establish the existence and uniqueness of the solution of Laplace’s equation
under the boundary conditions mentioned, provided that the shape of the bound-
ary and the functions appearing in the boundary conditions satisfy certain very mild
requirements. However, the proofs of these theorems, and even their accurate state-
ment, are beyond the scope of the present book. Our only concern will be solving
some typical problems by means of separation of variables and Fourier series.
    While the problems chosen as examples have interesting physical interpretations
(in terms of electrostatic potentials or steady state temperature distributions, for
instance), our purpose here is primarily to point out some of the features that may
occur during their mathematical solution. It is also worth noting again that more
complicated problems can sometimes be solved by expressing the solution as the
sum of solutions of several simpler problems (see Problems 3 and 4).
12 Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet (1805–1859) was born in Germany of Belgian ancestry. He was a pro-
fessor at Berlin and, after the death of Gauss, at Göttingen. In 1829 he provided the first set of conditions
sufficient to guarantee the convergence of a Fourier series. The definition of function that is usually used
today in elementary calculus is essentially the one given by Dirichlet in 1837. Although he is best known
for his work in analysis and differential equations, Dirichlet was also one of the leading number theorists
of the nineteenth century.
13 Carl Gottfried Neumann (1832–1925), a German mathematician and professor at Leipzig for more than
forty years, made contributions to differential equations, integral equations, and complex variables.
Dirichlet Problem for a Rectangle. Consider the mathematical problem of finding the
function u satisfying Laplace’s equation (1)
                                       uxx + uyy = 0,
in the rectangle 0 < x < a, 0 < y < b, and also satisfying the boundary conditions
                      u(x, 0) = 0,     u(x, b) = 0,           0 < x < a,
                                                                                     (4)
                      u(0, y) = 0,     u(a, y) = f (y),       0 ≤ y ≤ b,
where f is a given function on 0 ≤ y ≤ b (see Figure 10.8.1).
                              y
                                          u(x, b) = 0
                              b                                (a, b)
                    u(0, y) = 0         uxx + uyy = 0          u(a, y) = f (y)
                                          u(x, 0) = 0        a        x
                     FIGURE 10.8.1     Dirichlet problem for a rectangle.
   To solve this problem, we wish to construct a fundamental set of solutions satisfying
the partial differential equation and the homogeneous boundary conditions; then we
will superpose these solutions so as to satisfy the remaining boundary condition. Let
us assume that
                                    u(x, y) = X (x)Y(y)                              (5)
and substitute for u in Eq. (1). This yields
                                     X         Y 
                                            =−        = λ,
                                      X           Y
where λ is the separation constant. Thus we obtain the two ordinary differential
equations
                                      X  − λX = 0,                                 (6)
                                         
                                      Y + λY = 0.                                    (7)
If we now substitute for u from Eq. (5) in each of the homogeneous boundary
conditions, we find that
                                           X (0) = 0                                 (8)
and
                                  Y(0) = 0,         Y(b) = 0.                        (9)
   We will first determine the solution of the differential equation (7) subject to
the boundary conditions (9). However, this problem is essentially identical to one
encountered previously in Sections 10.1, 10.5, and 10.7. We conclude that there are
nontrivial solutions if and only if λ is an eigenvalue, namely,
                               λ = (nπ/b)2 ,         n = 1, 2, . . . ,             (10)
and Y(y) is proportional to the corresponding eigenfunction sin(nπy/b). Next, we
substitute from Eq. (10) for λ in Eq. (6), obtaining
                                    X  − (nπ/b)2 X = 0.
To solve this equation subject to the boundary condition (8), it is convenient to write
the general solution as
                       X (x) = k1 cosh(nπx/b) + k2 sinh(nπx/b).                    (11)
The boundary condition (8) then requires that k1 = 0. Therefore, X (x) must be
proportional to sinh(nπx/b). Thus we obtain the fundamental solutions
                                        nπx       nπy
                     un (x, y) = sinh         sin      ,      n = 1, 2, . . . .    (12)
                                          b         b
These functions satisfy the differential equation (1) and all the homogeneous
boundary conditions for each value of n.
  To satisfy the remaining nonhomogeneous boundary condition at x = a,we assume,
as usual, that we can represent the solution u(x, y) in the form
                               ∞                  ∞
                                                                nπx        nπy
                   u(x, y) =       cn un (x, y) =      cn sinh         sin      .  (13)
                                                                  b         b
                               n=1                 n=1
The coefficients cn are determined by the boundary condition
                                    ∞
                                                  nπa       nπy
                        u(a, y) =        cn sinh       sin        = f (y).         (14)
                                                   b         b
                                    n=1
Therefore, the quantities cn sinh(nπa/b) must be the coefficients in the Fourier sine
series of period 2b for f and are given by
                                                
                                    nπa       2 b             nπy
                           cn sinh        =         f (y) sin         dy.          (15)
                                      b       b 0               b
Thus the solution of the partial differential equation (1) satisfying the boundary
conditions (4) is given by Eq. (13) with the coefficients cn computed from Eq. (15).
  From Eqs. (13) and (15), we can see that the nth term of the solution contains the
factor sinh(nπx/b)/ sinh(nπa/b). To estimate this quantity for large n, we can use the
approximation sinh ξ ∼  = 21 eξ and thereby obtain
                  sinh(nπx/b) ∼ 21 exp(nπx/b)
                                 = 1                   = exp[−nπ(a − x)/b].
                  sinh(nπa/b)        2
                                       exp(nπa/b)
Thus this factor has the character of a negative exponential; consequently, the series
(13) converges quite rapidly unless a − x is very small.
        To illustrate these results, let a = 3, b = 2, and
EXAMPLE                                             
                                                      y,       0 ≤ y ≤ 1,
   1                                        f (y) =                                                   (16)
                                                      2 − y,   1 ≤ y ≤ 2.
        By evaluating cn from Eq. (15), we find that
                                                         8 sin(nπ/2)
                                                cn =                    .                             (17)
                                                     n2 π2 sinh(3nπ/2)
        Then u(x, y) is given by Eq. (13). Keeping 20 terms in the series, we can plot u versus x and y,
        as shown in Figure 10.8.2. Alternatively, we can construct a contour plot showing level curves
        of u(x, y); Figure 10.8.3 is such a plot, with an increment of 0.1 between adjacent curves.
                                                         u
                                                      1.0
                                                      0.8
                                                      0.6
             y                                                                                      x
                  2                                   0.4                                    3
                                                      0.2                        2
                                      1
                                                                      1
                            FIGURE 10.8.2        Plot of u versus x and y for Example 1.
                         y
                          2
                                                       u=0                         u = 0.1
                                                                                   u = 0.3
                                                                                   u = 0.5
                                                                                   u = 0.7
                              u=0
                                                                                   u = 0.9
                          1
                                                                                   u = 0.8
                                                                                   u = 0.6
                                                                                   u = 0.4
                                                                                   u = 0.2
                                                       u=0
                                               1                 2               3         x
                            FIGURE 10.8.3         Level curves of u(x, y) for Example 1.
Dirichlet Problem for a Circle. Consider the problem of solving Laplace’s equation in a
circular region r < a subject to the boundary condition
                                             u(a, θ) = f (θ),                      (18)
where f is a given function on 0 ≤ θ < 2π (see Figure 10.8.4). In polar coordinates
(r, θ), Laplace’s equation has the form
                                               1         1
                                      urr + ur + 2 uθθ = 0.                        (19)
                                                r        r
To complete the statement of the problem, we note that for u(r, θ) to be single-valued,
it is necessary that u be periodic in θ with period 2π. Moreover, we state explicitly
that u(r, θ) must be bounded for r ≤ a, since this will become important later.
                                                      y
                        u(a, θ ) = f (θ )
                                                              a
                                                                θ
                                                                            x
                                            urr + 1r ur + 12 uθθ = 0
                                                          r
                       FIGURE 10.8.4            Dirichlet problem for a circle.
   To apply the method of separation of variables to this problem, we assume that
                                          u(r, θ) = R(r)(θ)                       (20)
and substitute for u in the differential equation (19). This yields
                                              1            1
                                  R  + R  + 2 R = 0,
                                              r            r
or
                                        R       R          
                                    r2       +r         =−         = λ,            (21)
                                          R        R          
where λ is the separation constant. Thus we obtain the two ordinary differential
equations
                                       r 2 R + rR − λR = 0,                     (22)
                                              + λ = 0.                         (23)
In this problem there are no homogeneous boundary conditions; recall, however,
that solutions must be bounded and also periodic in θ with period 2π. It is possible
to show (Problem 9) that the periodicity condition requires λ to be real. We will
consider in turn the cases in which λ is negative, zero, and positive.
   If λ < 0, let λ = −μ2 , where μ > 0. Then Eq. (23) becomes  − μ2  = 0, and
consequently,
                                     (θ) = c1 eμθ + c2 e−μθ .                             (24)
Thus (θ) can be periodic only if c1 = c2 = 0, and we conclude that λ cannot be
negative.
   If λ = 0, then Eq. (23) becomes  = 0, and thus
                                           (θ) = c1 + c2 θ.                               (25)
For (θ) to be periodic we must have c2 = 0, so that (θ) is a constant. Further, for
λ = 0, Eq. (22) becomes
                                           r 2 R + rR = 0.                              (26)
This equation is of the Euler type and has the solution
                                        R(r) = k1 + k2 ln r.                               (27)
The logarithmic term cannot be accepted if u(r, θ) is to remain bounded as r → 0;
hence k2 = 0. Thus, corresponding to λ = 0, we conclude that u(r, θ) must be a
constant—that is, proportional to the solution
                                              u0 (r, θ) = 1.                               (28)
   Finally, if λ > 0, we let λ = μ2 , where μ > 0. Then Eqs. (22) and (23) become
                                      r 2 R + rR − μ2 R = 0                             (29)
and
                                            + μ2  = 0,                                 (30)
respectively. Equation (29) is an Euler equation and has the solution
                                       R(r) = k1 r μ + k2 r −μ ,                           (31)
while Eq. (30) has the solution
                                   (θ) = c1 sin μθ + c2 cos μθ.                           (32)
In order for  to be periodic with period 2π, it is necessary for μ to be a positive
integer n. With μ = n it follows that the solution r −μ in Eq. (31) must be discarded
since it becomes unbounded as r → 0. Consequently, k2 = 0 and the appropriate
solutions of Eq. (19) are
               un (r, θ) = r n cos nθ,        vn (r, θ) = r n sin nθ,    n = 1, 2, . . . . (33)
These functions, together with u0 (r, θ) = 1, form a set of fundamental solutions for
the present problem.
   In the usual way, we now assume that u can be expressed as a linear combination
of the fundamental solutions; that is,
                                               ∞
                                     c0  n
                          u(r, θ) =       +        r (cn cos nθ + kn sin nθ).              (34)
                                     2
                                             n=1
         The boundary condition (18) then requires that
                                                ∞
                                         c0  n
                             u(a, θ) =       +     a (cn cos nθ + kn sin nθ) = f (θ)                 (35)
                                         2
                                               n=1
         for 0 ≤ θ < 2π. The function f may be extended outside this interval so that it is
         periodic with period 2π and therefore has a Fourier series of the form (35). Since
         the extended function has period 2π, we may compute its Fourier coefficients by
         integrating over any period of the function. In particular, it is convenient to use the
         original interval (0, 2π); then
                                           2π
                                       1
                              an cn =          f (θ) cos nθ dθ,       n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ;           (36)
                                       π    0
                                           2π
                                       1
                             an kn =           f (θ) sin nθ dθ,       n = 1, 2, . . . .              (37)
                                       π    0
         With this choice of the coefficients, Eq. (34) represents the solution of the boundary
         value problem of Eqs. (18) and (19). Note that in this problem we needed both sine
         and cosine terms in the solution. This is because the boundary data were given on
         0 ≤ θ < 2π and have period 2π. As a consequence, the full Fourier series is required,
         rather than sine or cosine terms alone.
PROBLEMS  1. (a) Find the solution u(x, y) of Laplace’s equation in the rectangle 0 < x < a, 0 < y < b,
             that satisfies the boundary conditions
                                    u(0, y) = 0,      u(a, y) = 0,        0 < y < b,
                                    u(x, 0) = 0,      u(x, b) = g(x),     0 ≤ x ≤ a.
             (b) Find the solution if
                                                   
                                                     x,         0 ≤ x ≤ a/2,
                                           g(x) =
                                                     a − x,   a/2 ≤ x ≤ a.
             (c) For a = 3 and b = 1, plot u versus x for several values of y and also plot u versus y for
             several values of x.
             (d) Plot u versus both x and y in three dimensions. Also draw a contour plot showing
             several level curves of u(x, y) in the xy-plane.
          2. Find the solution u(x, y) of Laplace’s equation in the rectangle 0 < x < a, 0 < y < b, that
             satisfies the boundary conditions
                                    u(0, y) = 0,         u(a, y) = 0,     0 < y < b,
                                    u(x, 0) = h(x),      u(x, b) = 0,     0 ≤ x ≤ a.
3. (a) Find the solution u(x, y) of Laplace’s equation in the rectangle 0 < x < a, 0 < y < b,
   that satisfies the boundary conditions
                         u(0, y) = 0,         u(a, y) = f (y),      0 < y < b,
                         u(x, 0) = h(x),      u(x, b) = 0,          0 ≤ x ≤ a.
   Hint: Consider the possibility of adding the solutions of two problems, one with homo-
   geneous boundary conditions except for u(a, y) = f (y), and the other with homogeneous
   boundary conditions except for u(x, 0) = h(x).
   (b) Find the solution if h(x) = (x/a)2 and f (y) = 1 − (y/b).
   (c) Let a = 2 and b = 2. Plot the solution in several ways: u versus x, u versus y, u versus
   both x and y, and a contour plot.
4. Show how to find the solution u(x, y) of Laplace’s equation in the rectangle 0 < x < a,
   0 < y < b, that satisfies the boundary conditions
                        u(0, y) = k(y),       u(a, y) = f (y),      0 < y < b,
                        u(x, 0) = h(x),       u(x, b) = g(x),       0 ≤ x ≤ a.
   Hint: See Problem 3.
5. Find the solution u(r, θ) of Laplace’s equation
                                     urr + (1/r)ur + (1/r 2 )uθθ = 0
   outside the circle r = a, that satisfies the boundary condition
                                   u(a, θ) = f (θ),     0 ≤ θ < 2π,
   on the circle. Assume that u(r, θ) is single-valued and bounded for r > a.
6. (a) Find the solution u(r, θ) of Laplace’s equation in the semicircular region r < a,
   0 < θ < π, that satisfies the boundary conditions
                            u(r, 0) = 0,      u(r, π) = 0,       0 ≤ r < a,
                                    u(a, θ) = f (θ),     0 ≤ θ ≤ π.
   Assume that u is single-valued and bounded in the given region.
   (b) Find the solution if f (θ) = θ(π − θ).
   (c) Let a = 2 and plot the solution in several ways: u versus r, u versus θ, u versus both r
   and θ, and a contour plot.
7. Find the solution u(r, θ) of Laplace’s equation in the circular sector 0 < r < a,
   0 < θ < α, that satisfies the boundary conditions
                            u(r, 0) = 0,      u(r, α) = 0,       0 ≤ r < a,
                                    u(a, θ) = f (θ),     0 ≤ θ ≤ α.
   Assume that u is single-valued and bounded in the sector and that 0 < α < 2π.
8. (a) Find the solution u(x, y) of Laplace’s equation in the semi-infinite strip 0 < x < a,
   y > 0, that satisfies the boundary conditions
                               u(0, y) = 0,      u(a, y) = 0,      y > 0,
                                    u(x, 0) = f (x),     0≤x≤a
   and the additional condition that u(x, y) → 0 as y → ∞.
   (b) Find the solution if f (x) = x(a − x).
   (c) Let a = 5. Find the smallest value of y0 for which u(x, y) ≤ 0.1 for all y ≥ y0 .
 9. Show that Eq. (23) has periodic solutions only if λ is real.
    Hint: Let λ = −μ2 , where μ = ν + iσ with ν and σ real.
10. Consider the problem of finding a solution u(x, y) of Laplace’s equation in the rectangle
    0 < x < a, 0 < y < b, that satisfies the boundary conditions
                             ux (0, y) = 0,        ux (a, y) = f (y),    0 < y < b,
                             uy (x, 0) = 0,        uy (x, b) = 0,        0 ≤ x ≤ a.
    This is an example of a Neumann problem.
    (a) Show that Laplace’s equation and the homogeneous boundary conditions determine
    the fundamental set of solutions
                       u0 (x, y) = c0 ,
                       un (x, y) = cn cosh(nπx/b) cos(nπy/b),             n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
    (b) By superposing the fundamental solutions of part (a), formally determine a function
    u satisfying the nonhomogeneous boundary condition ux (a, y) = f (y). Note that when
    ux (a, y) is calculated, the constant term in u(x, y) is eliminated, and there is no condition
    from which to determine c0 . Furthermore, it must be possible to express f by means of a
    Fourier cosine series of period 2b, which does not have a constant term. This means that
                                                   b
                                                       f (y) dy = 0
                                                    0
    is a necessary condition for the given problem to be solvable. Finally, note that c0 remains
    arbitrary, and hence the solution is determined only up to this additive constant. This is a
    property of all Neumann problems.
11. Find a solution u(r, θ) of Laplace’s equation inside the circle r = a that satisfies the
    boundary condition on the circle
                                        ur (a, θ) = g(θ),       0 ≤ θ < 2π.
    Note that this is a Neumann problem and that its solution is determined only up to an
    arbitrary additive constant. State a necessary condition on g(θ) for this problem to be
    solvable by the method of separation of variables (see Problem 10).
12. (a) Find the solution u(x, y) of Laplace’s equation in the rectangle 0 < x < a,
    0 < y < b, that satisfies the boundary conditions
                               u(0, y) = 0,         u(a, y) = 0,        0 < y < b,
                             uy (x, 0) = 0,        u(x, b) = g(x),      0 ≤ x ≤ a.
    Note that this is neither a Dirichlet nor a Neumann problem, but a mixed problem in
    which u is prescribed on part of the boundary and its normal derivative on the rest.
    (b) Find the solution if
                                                
                                                  x,           0 ≤ x ≤ a/2,
                                      g(x) =
                                                  a − x, a/2 ≤ x ≤ a.
    (c) Let a = 3 and b = 1. By drawing suitable plots, compare this solution with the solution
    of Problem 1.
13. (a) Find the solution u(x, y) of Laplace’s equation in the rectangle 0 < x < a,
    0 < y < b, that satisfies the boundary conditions
                           u(0, y) = 0,         u(a, y) = f (y),      0 < y < b,
                           u(x, 0) = 0,        uy (x, b) = 0,         0 ≤ x ≤ a.
    Hint: Eventually, it will be necessary to expand f (y) in a series that makes use of the
    functions sin(πy/2b), sin(3πy/2b), sin(5πy/2b), . . . (see Problem 39 of Section 10.4).
    (b) Find the solution if f (y) = y(2b − y).
    (c) Let a = 3 and b = 2; plot the solution in several ways.
14. (a) Find the solution u(x, y) of Laplace’s equation in the rectangle 0 < x < a,
    0 < y < b, that satisfies the boundary conditions
                          ux (0, y) = 0,       ux (a, y) = 0,          0 < y < b,
                           u(x, 0) = 0,          u(x, b) = g(x),       0 ≤ x ≤ a.
    (b) Find the solution if g(x) = 1 + x2 (x − a)2 .
    (c) Let a = 3 and b = 2; plot the solution in several ways.
15. By writing Laplace’s equation in cylindrical coordinates r, θ, and z and then assuming that
    the solution is axially symmetric (no dependence on θ), we obtain the equation
                                         urr + (1/r)ur + uzz = 0.
    Assuming that u(r, z) = R(r)Z(z), show that R and Z satisfy the equations
                               rR + R + λ2 rR = 0,         Z  − λ2 Z = 0.
    The equation for R is Bessel’s equation of order zero with independent variable λr.
16. Flow in an Aquifer. Consider the flow of water in a porous medium, such as sand, in an
    aquifer. The flow is driven by the hydraulic head, a measure of the potential energy of the
    water above the aquifer. Let R : 0 < x < a, 0 < z < b be a vertical section of an aquifer. In
    a uniform, homogeneous medium, the hydraulic head u(x, z) satisfies Laplace’s equation
                                          uxx + uzz = 0        in R.                           (i)
    If water cannot flow through the sides and bottom of R, then the boundary conditions
    there are
                              ux (0, z) = 0, ux (a, z) = 0,         0≤z≤b                     (ii)
                                       uz (x, 0) = 0,      0 ≤ x ≤ a.                       (iii)
    Finally, suppose that the boundary condition at z = b is
                                    u(x, b) = b + αx,         0 ≤ x ≤ a,                     (iv)
    where α is the slope of the water table.
    (a) Solve the given boundary value problem for u(x, z).
    (b) Let a = 1000, b = 500, and α = 0.1. Draw a contour plot of the solution in R; that is,
    plot some level curves of u(x, z).
    (c) Water flows along paths in R that are orthogonal to the level curves of u(x, z) in the
    direction of decreasing u. Plot some of the flow paths.
         Derivation of the Heat Conduction Equation. In this section we derive the differ-
APPENDIX ential equation that, to a first approximation at least, governs the conduction of heat
   A     in solids. It is important to understand that the mathematical analysis of a physical
         situation or process such as this ultimately rests on a foundation of empirical knowl-
         edge of the phenomenon involved. The mathematician must have a place to start, so
         to speak, and this place is furnished by experience. Consider a uniform rod insulated
         on the lateral surfaces so that heat can flow only in the axial direction. It has been
         demonstrated many times that if two parallel cross sections of the same area A and
         different temperatures T1 and T2 , respectively, are separated by a small distance d,
         an amount of heat per unit time will pass from the warmer section to the cooler one.
         Moreover, this amount of heat is proportional to the area A and to the temperature
         difference | T2 − T1 | and is inversely proportional to the separation distance d. Thus
                                Amount of heat per unit time = κA| T2 − T1 |/d,                                       (1)
         where the positive proportionality factor κ is called the thermal conductivity and
         depends primarily on the material14 of the rod. The relation (1) is often called
         Fourier’s law of heat conduction. We repeat that Eq. (1) is an empirical, not a theo-
         retical, result and that it can be, and often has been, verified by careful experiment.
         It is the basis of the mathematical theory of heat conduction.
            Now consider a straight rod of uniform cross section and homogeneous material,
         oriented so that the x-axis lies along the axis of the rod (see Figure 10.A.1). Let x = 0
         and x = L designate the ends of the bar.
                                                                                         x
                                      H = –κ Aux                             H = κ Aux
                                                      x = x0       x = x 0 + Δx
                            FIGURE 10.A.1       Conduction of heat in an element of a rod.
            We will assume that the sides of the bar are perfectly insulated so that there is no
         passage of heat through them. We will also assume that the temperature u depends
         only on the axial position x and the time t, and not on the lateral coordinates y and z.
         In other words, we assume that the temperature remains constant on any cross section
         of the bar. This assumption is usually satisfactory when the lateral dimensions of the
         rod are small compared to its length.
            The differential equation governing the temperature in the bar is an expression of
         a fundamental physical balance; the rate at which heat flows into any portion of the
         bar is equal to the rate at which heat is absorbed in that portion of the bar. The terms
         in the equation are called the flux (flow) term and the absorption term, respectively.
         14Actually, κ also depends on the temperature, but if the temperature range is not too great, it is satisfactory
         to assume that κ is independent of temperature.
   We will first calculate the flux term. Consider an element of the bar lying between
the cross sections x = x0 and x = x0 + x, where x0 is arbitrary and x is small. The
instantaneous rate of heat transfer H(x0 , t) from left to right across the cross section
x = x0 is given by
                                              u(x0 + d/2, t) − u(x0 − d/2, t)
                     H(x0 , t) = − lim κA
                                     d→0                      d
                                = −κAux (x0 , t).                                                     (2)
The minus sign appears in this equation because there will be a positive flow of heat
from left to right only if the temperature is greater to the left of x = x0 than to the
right; in this case ux (x0 , t) is negative. In a similar manner, the rate at which heat
passes from left to right through the cross section x = x0 + x is given by
                              H(x0 + x, t) = −κAux (x0 + x, t).                                     (3)
The net rate at which heat flows into the segment of the bar between x = x0 and
x = x0 + x is thus given by
             Q = H(x0 , t) − H(x0 + x, t) = κA[ux (x0 + x, t) − ux (x0 , t)],                       (4)
and the amount of heat entering this bar element in time t is
                           Qt = κA[ux (x0 + x, t) − ux (x0 , t)] t.                                (5)
   Let us now calculate the absorption term. The average change in temperature u,
in the time interval t, is proportional to the amount of heat Qt introduced and is
inversely proportional to the mass m of the element. Thus
                                             1 Qt         Qt
                                     u =             =           ,                                   (6)
                                             s m       sρAx
where the constant of proportionality s is known as the specific heat of the material of
the bar, and ρ is its density.15 The average temperature change u in the bar element
under consideration is the actual temperature change at some intermediate point
x = x0 + θx, where 0 < θ < 1. Thus Eq. (6) can be written as
                                                                          Qt
                        u(x0 + θx, t + t) − u(x0 + θx, t) =                                        (7)
                                                                        sρAx
or as
                   Qt = [u(x0 + θx, t + t) − u(x0 + θx, t)]sρAx.                                 (8)
To balance the flux and absorption terms, we equate the two expressions for Qt:
      κA[ux (x0 + x, t) − ux (x0 , t)]t
                                  = sρA[u(x0 + θx, t + t) − u(x0 + θx, t)]x.                      (9)
Upon dividing Eq. (9) by x t and then letting x → 0 and t → 0, we obtain the
heat conduction or diffusion equation
                                             α2 uxx = ut .                                           (10)
15The dependence of the density and specific heat on temperature is relatively small and will be neglected.
Thus both ρ and s will be considered as constants.
The quantity α2 defined by
                                          α2 = κ/ρs                                   (11)
is called the thermal diffusivity and is a parameter that depends only on the mate-
rial of the bar. The units of α2 are (length)2 /time. Typical values of α2 are given in
Table 10.5.1.
   Several relatively simple conditions may be imposed at the ends of the bar. For
example, the temperature at an end may be maintained at some constant value T.
This might be accomplished by placing the end of the bar in thermal contact with
some reservoir of sufficient size so that any heat that flows between the bar and
the reservoir does not appreciably alter the temperature of the reservoir. At an end
where this is done, the boundary condition is
                                            u = T.                                    (12)
   Another simple boundary condition occurs if the end is insulated so that no heat
passes through it. Recalling the expression (2) for the amount of heat crossing any
cross section of the bar, we conclude that the condition of insulation is that this
quantity vanish. Thus
                                            ux = 0                                    (13)
is the boundary condition at an insulated end.
   A more general type of boundary condition occurs if the rate of flow of heat through
an end of the bar is proportional to the temperature there. Let us consider the end
x = 0, where the rate of flow of heat from left to right is given by −κAux (0, t); see
Eq. (2). Hence the rate of heat flow out of the bar (from right to left) at x = 0 is
κAux (0, t). If this quantity is proportional to the temperature u(0, t), then we obtain
the boundary condition
                            ux (0, t) − h1 u(0, t) = 0,    t > 0,                     (14)
where h1 is a nonnegative constant of proportionality. Note that h1 = 0 corresponds
to an insulated end and that h1 → ∞ corresponds to an end held at zero temperature.
   If heat flow is taking place at the right end of the bar (x = L), then in a similar way
we obtain the boundary condition
                            ux (L, t) + h2 u(L, t) = 0,     t > 0,                    (15)
where again h2 is a nonnegative constant of proportionality.
   Finally, to determine completely the flow of heat in the bar, it is necessary to state
the temperature distribution at one fixed instant, usually taken as the initial time
t = 0. This initial condition is of the form
                               u(x, 0) = f (x),      0 ≤ x ≤ L.                       (16)
   The problem then is to determine the solution of the differential equation (10)
subject to one of the boundary conditions (12) to (15) at each end and to the initial
condition (16) at t = 0.
   Several generalizations of the heat equation (10) also occur in practice. First, the
bar material may be nonuniform, and the cross section may not be constant along
the length of the bar. In this case, the parameters κ, ρ, s, and A may depend on the
axial variable x. Going back to Eq. (2), we see that the rate of heat transfer from left
to right across the cross section at x = x0 is now given by
                              H(x0 , t) = −κ(x0 )A(x0 )ux (x0 , t)                  (17)
with a similar expression for H(x0 + x, t). If we introduce these quantities into
Eq. (4) and eventually into Eq. (9), and proceed as before, we obtain the partial
differential equation
                                      (κAux )x = sρAut .                            (18)
We will usually write Eq. (18) in the form
                                     r(x)ut = [p(x)ux ]x ,                          (19)
where p(x) = κ(x)A(x) and r(x) = s(x)ρ(x)A(x). Note that both of these quantities
are intrinsically positive.
   A second generalization occurs if there are other ways in which heat enters or
leaves the bar. Suppose that there is a source that adds heat to the bar at a rate
G(x, t, u) per unit time per unit length, where G(x, t, u) > 0. In this case we must add
the term G(x, t, u) x t to the left side of Eq. (9), and this leads to the differential
equation
                              r(x)ut = [p(x)ux ]x + G(x, t, u).                     (20)
If G(x, t, u) < 0, then we speak of a sink that removes heat from the bar at the rate
G(x, t, u) per unit time per unit length. To make the problem tractable, we must
restrict the form of the function G. In particular, we assume that G is linear in u and
that the coefficient of u does not depend on t. Thus we write
                                G(x, t, u) = F(x, t) − q(x)u.                       (21)
The minus sign in Eq. (21) has been introduced so that certain equations that appear
later will have their customary forms. Substituting from Eq. (21) into Eq. (20), we
obtain
                           r(x)ut = [p(x)ux ]x − q(x)u + F(x, t).                   (22)
This equation is sometimes called the generalized heat conduction equation. Bound-
ary value problems for Eq. (22) will be discussed to some extent in Chapter 11.
   Finally, if instead of a one-dimensional bar, we consider a body with more than
one significant space dimension, then the temperature is a function of two or three
space coordinates rather than of x alone. Considerations similar to those leading to
Eq. (10) can be employed to derive the heat conduction equation in two dimensions
                                     α2 (uxx + uyy ) = ut ,                         (23)
or in three dimensions
                                 α2 (uxx + uyy + uzz ) = ut .                       (24)
The boundary conditions corresponding to Eqs. (12) and (13) for multidimensional
problems correspond to a prescribed temperature distribution on the boundary, or to
an insulated boundary. Similarly, the initial temperature distribution will in general
be a function of x and y for Eq. (23) and a function of x, y, and z for Eq. (24).
         Derivation of the Wave Equation. In this appendix we derive the wave equation
APPENDIX in one space dimension as it applies to the transverse vibrations of an elastic string,
   B     or cable; the elastic string may be thought of as a guitar string, a guy wire, or possi-
         bly an electric power line. The same equation, however, with the variables properly
         interpreted, occurs in many other wave problems having only one significant space
         variable.
            Consider a perfectly flexible elastic string stretched tightly between supports fixed
         at the same horizontal level (see Figure 10.B.1a). Let the x-axis lie along the string
         with the endpoints located at x = 0 and x = L. If the string is set in motion at some
         initial time t = 0 (by plucking, for example) and is thereafter left undisturbed, it will
         vibrate freely in a vertical plane, provided that damping effects, such as air resistance,
         are neglected. To determine the differential equation governing this motion, we will
         consider the forces acting on a small element of the string of length x lying between
         the points x and x + x (see Figure 10.B.1b). We assume that the motion of the string
         is small and that, as a consequence, each point on the string moves solely in a vertical
         line. We denote by u(x, t) the vertical displacement of the point x at the time t. Let
         the tension in the string, which always acts in the tangential direction, be denoted by
         T(x, t), and let ρ denote the mass per unit length of the string.
                                      u
                                             T                T
                                                                         x
                                     x=0                          x=L
                                                     (a)
                                                      T (x + Δx, t)
                                                       θ + Δθ
             θ
                                                                                      T
         T(x, t)
                                                                                            V = T sin θ
                                                                                    θ
                    x         ⎯x            x + Δx
                                                                            H = T cos θ
                                     (b)                                        (c)
                             FIGURE 10.B.1 (a) An elastic string under tension.
                                    (b) An element of the displaced string.
                               (c) Resolution of the tension T into components.
            Newton’s law, as it applies to the element x of the string, states that the net
         external force, due to the tension at the ends of the element, must be equal to the
         product of the mass of the element and the acceleration of its mass center. Since
         there is no horizontal acceleration, the horizontal components must satisfy
                               T(x + x, t) cos(θ + θ) − T(x, t) cos θ = 0.                    (1)
If we denote the horizontal component of the tension (see Figure 10.B.1c) by H, then
Eq. (1) states that H is independent of x.
   On the other hand, the vertical components satisfy
                 T(x + x, t) sin(θ + θ) − T(x, t) sin θ = ρ x utt (x, t),          (2)
where x is the coordinate of the center of mass of the element of the string under
consideration. Clearly, x lies in the interval x < x < x + x. The weight of the
string, which acts vertically downward, is assumed to be negligible and has been
neglected in Eq. (2).
   If the vertical component of T is denoted by V, then Eq. (2) can be written as
                           V(x + x, t) − V(x, t)
                                                      = ρutt (x, t).
                                     x
Passing to the limit as x → 0 gives
                                   Vx (x, t) = ρutt (x, t).                           (3)
To express Eq. (3) entirely in terms of u, we note that
                           V(x, t) = H(t) tan θ = H(t)ux (x, t).
Hence Eq. (3) becomes
                                      (Hux )x = ρutt ,
or, since H is independent of x,
                                       Huxx = ρutt .                                  (4)
For small motions of the string, it is permissible to replace H = T cos θ by T. Then
Eq. (4) takes its customary form
                                       a2 uxx = utt ,                                 (5)
where
                                        a2 = T/ρ.                                     (6)
We will assume further that a2 is a constant, although this is not required in our
derivation, even for small motions. Equation (5) is called the wave equation for one
space dimension. Since T has the dimension of force, and ρ that of mass/length, it
follows that the constant a has the dimension of velocity. It is possible to identify
a as the velocity with which a small disturbance (wave) moves along the string.
According to Eq. (6), the wave velocity a varies directly with the tension in the string,
but inversely with the density of the string material. These facts are in agreement
with experience.
   As in the case of the heat conduction equation, there are various generalizations of
the wave equation (5). One important equation is known as the telegraph equation
and has the form
                            utt + cut + ku = a2 uxx + F(x, t),                        (7)
where c and k are nonnegative constants. The terms cut , ku, and F(x, t) arise from a
viscous damping force, an elastic restoring force, and an external force, respectively.
Note the similarity of Eq. (7), except for the term a2 uxx , to the equation for the
spring–mass system derived in Section 3.7; the additional term a2 uxx arises from a
consideration of internal elastic forces.
              The telegraph equation also governs the flow of voltage, or current, in a trans-
           mission line (hence its name); in this case the coefficients are related to electrical
           parameters in the line.
              For a vibrating system with more than one significant space coordinate, it may be
           necessary to consider the wave equation in two dimensions
                                                      a2 (uxx + uyy ) = utt ,                                       (8)
           or in three dimensions
                                                  a2 (uxx + uyy + uzz ) = utt .                                     (9)
REFERENCES The following books contain additional information on Fourier series:
           Buck, R. C., and Buck, E. F., Advanced Calculus (3rd ed.) (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978).
           Carslaw, H. S., Introduction to the Theory of Fourier’s Series and Integrals (3rd ed.) (Cambridge: Cambridge
              University Press, 1930; New York: Dover, 1952).
           Courant,R.,and John,F.,Introduction to Calculus andAnalysis (2 vols.) (Berlin/NewYork:Springer-Verlag,
              1999).
           Kaplan, W., Advanced Calculus (5th ed.) (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2003).
              A brief biography of Fourier and an annotated copy of his 1807 paper are contained in
           Grattan-Guinness, I., Joseph Fourier 1768–1830:A Survey of his Life and Work (Cambridge, MA: MIT
              Press, 1972).
              Useful references on partial differential equations and the method of separation of variables include
           the following:
           Churchill, R. V., and Brown, J. W., Fourier Series and Boundary Value Problems (8th ed.) (New York:
              McGraw-Hill, 2012).
           Haberman, R., Elementary Applied Partial Differential Equations: With Fourier Series and Boundary
              Value Problems (4th ed.) (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice-Hall, 2004).
           Pinsky, M. A., Partial Differential Equations and Boundary Value Problems with Applications (3rd ed.)
              (Boston: WCB/McGraw-Hill, 1998; Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 2011).
           Powers, D. L., Boundary Value Problems and Partial Differential Equations (6th ed.) (Boston: Academic
              Press, 2010).
           Strauss, W. A., Partial Differential Equations, an Introduction (2nd ed.) (New York: Wiley, 2009).
           Weinberger, H. F., A First Course in Partial Differential Equations with Complex Variables and Transform
              Methods (New York: Blaisdell, 1965; New York: Dover, 1995).
 CHAPTER
    11
              Boundary Value
              Problems and
              Sturm–Liouville
              Theory
              As a result of separating variables in a partial differential equation in Chapter 10, we
              repeatedly encountered the differential equation
                                           X  + λX = 0,       0<x<L
              with the boundary conditions
                                             X (0) = 0,      X (L) = 0.
              This boundary value problem is the prototype of a large class of problems that are
              important in applied mathematics. These problems are known as Sturm–Liouville
              boundary value problems. In this chapter we discuss the major properties of Sturm–
              Liouville problems and their solutions; in the process we are able to generalize
              somewhat the method of separation of variables for partial differential equations.
11.1 The Occurrence of Two-Point Boundary Value Problems
              In Chapter 10 we described the method of separation of variables as a means of
              solving certain problems involving partial differential equations. The heat conduction
              problem consisting of the partial differential equation
                                        α2 uxx = ut ,    0 < x < L,     t>0                         (1)
              subject to the boundary conditions
                                      u(0, t) = 0,      u(L, t) = 0,      t>0                       (2)
                                                                                                  677
and the initial condition
                               u(x, 0) = f (x),      0≤x≤L                            (3)
is typical of the problems considered there. A crucial part of the process of solv-
ing such problems is to find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the differential
equation
                               X  + λX = 0,        0<x<L                            (4)
with the boundary conditions
                                   X (0) = 0,     X (L) = 0                           (5)
or perhaps
                                  X  (0) = 0,   X  (L) = 0.                         (6)
The sine or cosine functions that result from solving Eq. (4) subject to the boundary
conditions (5) or (6) are used to expand the initial temperature distribution f (x) in a
Fourier series.
   In this chapter we extend and generalize the results of Chapter 10. Our main goal
is to show how the method of separation of variables can be used to solve problems
somewhat more general than that of Eqs. (1), (2), and (3). We are interested in three
types of generalizations.
   First, we wish to consider more general partial differential equations—for example,
the equation
                            r(x)ut = [p(x)ux ]x − q(x)u + F(x, t).                    (7)
This equation can arise, as indicated in Appendix A of Chapter 10, in the study of heat
conduction in a bar of variable material properties in the presence of heat sources.
If p(x) and r(x) are constants, and if the source terms q(x)u and F(x, t) are zero, then
Eq. (7) reduces to Eq. (1). The partial differential equation (7) also occurs in the
investigation of other phenomena of a diffusive character.
   A second generalization is to allow more general boundary conditions. In
particular, we wish to consider boundary conditions of the form
                  ux (0, t) − h1 u(0, t) = 0,    ux (L, t) + h2 u(L, t) = 0.          (8)
Such conditions occur when the rate of heat flow through an end of the bar is pro-
portional to the temperature there. Usually, h1 and h2 are nonnegative constants, but
in some cases they may be negative or depend on t. The boundary conditions (2)
are obtained in the limit as h1 → ∞ and h2 → ∞. The other important limiting case,
h1 = h2 = 0, gives the boundary conditions for insulated ends.
   The final generalization that we discuss in this chapter concerns the geometry of
the region in which the problem is posed. The results of Chapter 10 are adequate only
for a rather restricted class of problems, chiefly those in which the region of interest
is rectangular or, in a few cases, circular. Later in this chapter we consider certain
problems posed in a few other geometrical regions.
   Let us consider the equation
                                  r(x)ut = [p(x)ux ]x − q(x)u                         (9)
obtained by setting the term F(x, t) in Eq. (7) equal to zero. To separate the variables,
we assume that
                                     u(x, t) = X (x)T(t)                             (10)
and substitute for u in Eq. (9). We obtain
                             r(x)XT  = [p(x)X  ] T − q(x)XT,                      (11)
or, upon dividing by r(x)XT,
                               T    [p(x)X  ]    q(x)
                                  =              −        = −λ.                      (12)
                               T        r(x)X       r(x)
We have denoted the separation constant by −λ in anticipation of the fact that usually
it will turn out to be real and negative. From Eq. (12) we obtain the following two
ordinary differential equations for X and T:
                            [p(x)X  ] − q(x)X + λr(x)X = 0,                        (13)
                                                      
                                                   T + λT = 0.                       (14)
If we substitute from Eq. (10) for u in Eqs. (8) and assume that h1 and h2 are constants,
then we obtain the boundary conditions
                    X  (0) − h1 X (0) = 0,       X  (L) + h2 X (L) = 0.            (15)
   To proceed further we need to solve Eq. (13) subject to the boundary conditions
(15). Although this is a more general linear homogeneous two-point boundary value
problem than the problem consisting of the differential equation (4) and the bound-
ary conditions (5) or (6), the solutions behave in very much the same way. For every
value of λ, the problem (13), (15) has the trivial solution X (x) = 0. For certain values
of λ, called eigenvalues, there are also other, nontrivial solutions called eigenfunc-
tions. These eigenfunctions form the basis for series solutions of a variety of problems
in partial differential equations, such as the generalized heat conduction equation (9)
subject to the boundary conditions (8) and the initial condition (3).
   In this chapter we discuss some of the properties of solutions of two-point boundary
value problems for second order linear equations. Sometimes we consider the general
linear homogeneous equation
                               P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0,                         (16)
investigated in Chapter 3. However, for most purposes it is better to discuss equations
in which the first and second derivative terms are related as in Eq. (13). It is always
possible to transform the general equation (16) so that the derivative terms appear
as in Eq. (13) (see Problem 11).
   Boundary value problems with higher order differential equations can also occur;
in them the number of boundary conditions must equal the order of the differen-
tial equation. As a rule, the order of the differential equation is even, and half the
boundary conditions are given at each end of the interval. It is also possible for a
single boundary condition to involve values of the solution and/or its derivatives at
both boundary points; for example,
                                      y(0) − y(L) = 0.                               (17)
            The following example involves one boundary condition of the form (15) and is
        therefore more complicated than the problems in Section 10.1.
        Find the eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenfunctions of the boundary value problem
EXAMPLE
                                                    y + λy = 0,                                        (18)
   1                                      y(0) = 0,       y (1) + y(1) = 0.                             (19)
        One place where this problem occurs is in the heat conduction problem in a bar of unit length.
        The boundary condition at x = 0 corresponds to a zero temperature there. The boundary
        condition at x = 1 corresponds to a rate of heat flow that is proportional to the temperature
        there, and units are chosen so that the constant of proportionality is 1 (see Appendix A of
        Chapter 10).
            The solution of the differential equation may have one of several forms, depending on λ, so
        it is necessary to consider several cases. First, if λ = 0, the general solution of the differential
        equation is
                                                    y = c1 x + c2 .                                      (20)
        The two boundary conditions require that
                                              c2 = 0,      2c1 + c2 = 0,                                 (21)
        respectively. The only solution of Eqs. (21) is c1 = c2 = 0, so the boundary value problem has
        no nontrivial solution in this case. Hence λ = 0 is not an eigenvalue.
            If λ > 0, then the general solution of the differential equation (18) is
                                                      √                √
                                           y = c1 sin λ x + c2 cos λ x,                                  (22)
                 √
        where λ > 0. The boundary condition at x = 0 requires that c2 = 0; from the boundary
        condition at x = 1 we then obtain the equation
                                                  √      √          √
                                           c1 (sin λ + λ cos λ) = 0.
        For a nontrivial solution y we must have c1  = 0, and thus λ must satisfy
                                                  √     √          √
                                             sin λ + λ cos λ = 0.                                        (23)
                                        √                  √
        Note that if λ is such √that cos λ = 0, then sin λ  = 0,√and Eq. (23) is not satisfied. Hence we
        may assume that cos λ  = 0; dividing Eq. (23) by cos λ, we obtain
                                                   √              √
                                                     λ = −tan λ.                                         (24)
        The solutions of Eq. (24) can be√ determined
                                                √       numerically.
                                                            √          They√can also
                                                                                   √ be found approximately
        by sketching the graphs of f ( λ) = λ and g( λ) = −tan λ for λ > 0 on the same set of
        axes
        √ and identifying the points of intersection of the two curves (see Figure 11.1.1). The point
           λ√ = 0 is specifically excluded from this argument because the solution (22) is valid only
        for λ = 0. Despite the fact that the curves intersect there, λ = 0 is     √not an eigenvalue,
                                                                                                 √     as we
        have√already shown. The first three positive solutions of Eq. (24) are λ1 ∼       = 2.029, λ2 ∼
                                                                                                     = 4.913,
        and λ3 ∼   = 7.979.
                       √ As can be seen from Figure 11.1.1, the other roots are given with reasonable
        accuracy by λn ∼    = (2n − 1)π/2 for n = 4, 5, . . . , the precision of this estimate improving as n
        increases. Hence the eigenvalues are
                                            λ1 ∼= 4.116,         λ2 ∼
                                                                    = 24.14,
                                                                                                         (25)
                             λ3 ∼
                                = 63.66,       λn ∼
                                                  = (2n − 1)2 π2 /4       for n = 4, 5, . . . .
Finally, since c2 = 0, the eigenfunction corresponding to the eigenvalue λn is
                                                   
                              φn (x, λn ) = kn sin λn x;         n = 1, 2, . . . ,          (26)
where the constant kn remains arbitrary.
                           u
                                                     u = f (√λ )
                                                        = √λ
                        5π /2       u = g(√λ )
                                      = – tan √λ
                          2π
                        3π /2
                            π
                         π /2
                                       √λ 1           √λ 2           √λ 3              √λ
                       – π /2
                         –π
                      – 3π /2
                                   π /2           3π /2          5π /2          7π /2
                                                                      √               √
                     FIGURE 11.1.1          Graphical solution of        λ = − tan λ.
   Next consider λ < 0. In this case let λ = −μ so that μ > 0. Then Eq. (14) becomes
                                               y − μy = 0,                                (27)
and its general solution is
                                                 √                 √
                                   y = c1 sinh     μ x + c2 cosh μ x,                       (28)
       √
where μ > 0. Proceeding as in the previous case, we find that μ must satisfy the equation
                                             √               √
                                               μ = −tanh μ.                                 (29)
                                                         √        √            √          √
From Figure 11.1.2 it is clear that the graphs of f ( μ) = μ and g( μ) = − tanh μ intersect
                                                                     √
only at the origin. Hence there are no positive values of μ that satisfy Eq. (29), and hence
the boundary value problem (18), (19) has no negative eigenvalues.
   Finally, it is necessary to consider the possibility that λ may be complex. It is possible to
show by direct calculation that the problem (18), (19) has no complex eigenvalues. However,
in Section 11.2 we consider in more detail a large class of problems that includes this example.
One of the things we show there is that every problem in this class has only real eigenvalues.
Therefore, we omit the discussion of the nonexistence of complex eigenvalues here. Thus all
the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the problem (18), (19) are given by Eqs. (25) and (26).
                                        u
                                                             u = f (√μ ) = √μ
                                        1
                                                       1              2            √μ
                                                          u = g(√μ ) = –tanh√μ
                                       –1
                                                                             √          √
                            FIGURE 11.1.2         Graphical solution of       μ = − tanh μ.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 6, state whether the given boundary value problem is homo-
         geneous or nonhomogeneous.
          1. y + 4y = 0,      y(−1) = 0,       y(1) = 0
                         
          2. [(1 + x )y ] + 4y = 0,
                     2
                                             y(0) = 0,     y(1) = 1
          3. y + 4y = sin x,       y(0) = 0,     y(1) = 0
          4. −y + x2 y = λy,        y (0) − y(0) = 0,     y (1) + y(1) = 0
          5. −[(1 + x2 )y ] = λy + 1,        y(−1) = 0,       y(1) = 0
                                                     
          6. −y = λ(1 + x )y, 2
                                         y(0) = 0,   y (1) + 3y(1) = 0
         In each of Problems 7 through 10, assume that all eigenvalues are real.
         (a) Determine the form of the eigenfunctions and the determinantal equation satisfied by the
         nonzero eigenvalues.
         (b) Determine whether λ = 0 is an eigenvalue.
         (c) Find approximate values for λ1 and λ2 , the nonzero eigenvalues of smallest absolute value.
         (d) Estimate λn for large values of n.
          7. y + λy = 0,       y(0) = 0,     y(π) + y (π) = 0
          8. y + λy = 0,       y (0) = 0,    y(1) + y (1) = 0
                                         
          9. y + λy = 0,         y(0) − y (0) = 0,       y(1) + y (1) = 0
         10. y − λy = 0,       y(0) + y (0) = 0,      y(1) = 0
         11. Consider the general linear homogeneous second order equation
                                                P(x)y + Q(x)y + R(x)y = 0.                          (i)
             We seek an integrating factor μ(x) such that, upon multiplying Eq. (i) by μ(x), we can
             write the resulting equation in the form
                                               [μ(x)P(x)y ] + μ(x)R(x)y = 0.                        (ii)
             (a) By equating coefficients of y in Eqs. (i) and (ii), show that μ must be a solution of
                                                      Pμ = (Q − P  )μ.                             (iii)
    (b) Solve Eq. (iii) and thereby show that
                                                           x
                                                  1            Q(s)
                                        μ(x) =        exp            ds.                    (iv)
                                                 P(x)       x0 P(s)
    Compare this result with that of Problem 41 in Section 3.2.
In each of Problems 12 through 15, use the method of Problem 11 to transform the given
equation into the form [p(x)y ] + q(x)y = 0.
12. y − 2xy + λy = 0          (Hermite equation)
      2       
13. x y + xy + (x − ν )y = 0
                      2   2
                                           (Bessel equation)
                  
14. xy + (1 − x)y + λy = 0             (Laguerre equation)
                    
15. (1 − x )y − xy + α y = 0
            2             2
                                          (Chebyshev equation)
16. The equation
                                      utt + cut + ku = a2 uxx + F(x, t),                      (i)
    where a2 > 0, c ≥ 0, and k ≥ 0 are constants, is known as the telegraph equation. It arises
    in the study of an elastic string under tension (see Appendix B of Chapter 10). Equation (i)
    also occurs in other applications.Assuming that F(x, t) = 0,let u(x, t) = X (x)T(t),separate
    the variables in Eq. (i), and derive ordinary differential equations for X and T.
17. Consider the boundary value problem
                          y − 2y + (1 + λ)y = 0,         y(0) = 0,    y(1) = 0.
    (a) Introduce a new dependent variable u by the relation y = s(x)u. Determine s(x) so
    that the differential equation for u has no u term.
    (b) Solve the boundary value problem for u and thereby determine the eigenvalues and
    eigenfunctions of the original problem. Assume that all eigenvalues are real.
    (c) Also solve the given problem directly (without introducing u).
18. Consider the boundary value problem
                         y + 4y + (4 + 9λ)y = 0,         y(0) = 0,    y (L) = 0.
    (a) Determine, at least approximately, the real eigenvalues and the corresponding
    eigenfunctions by proceeding as in Problem 17(a, b).
    (b) Also solve the given problem directly (without introducing a new variable).
    Hint: In part (a) be sure to pay attention to the boundary conditions as well as the
    differential equation.
The differential equations in Problems 19 and 20 differ from those in previous problems in
that the parameter λ multiplies the y term as well as the y term. In each of these problems,
determine the real eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenfunctions.
19. y + y + λ(y + y) = 0,        y (0) = 0,   y(1) = 0
20. x2 y − λ(xy − y) = 0,        y(1) = 0,    y(2) − y (2) = 0
21. Consider the problem
                             y + λy = 0,       2y(0) + y (0) = 0,    y(1) = 0.
    (a) Find the determinantal equation satisfied by the positive eigenvalues.
    (b) Show that there is an infinite sequence of such eigenvalues.
    (c) Find λ1 and λ2 . Then show that λn ∼     = [(2n + 1)π/2]2 for large n.
    (d) Find the determinantal equation satisfied by the negative eigenvalues.
    (e) Show that there is exactly one negative eigenvalue and find its value.
22. Consider the problem
                           y + λy = 0,         αy(0) + y (0) = 0,     y(1) = 0,
    where α is a given constant.
    (a) Show that for all values of α there is an infinite sequence of positive eigenvalues.
    (b) If α < 1,show that all (real) eigenvalues are positive. Show that the smallest eigenvalue
    approaches zero as α approaches 1 from below.
    (c) Show that λ = 0 is an eigenvalue only if α = 1.
    (d) If α > 1, show that there is exactly one negative eigenvalue and that this eigenvalue
    decreases as α increases.
23. Consider the problem
                                y + λy = 0,        y(0) = 0,     y (L) = 0.
    Show that if φm and φn are eigenfunctions corresponding to the eigenvalues λm and λn ,
    respectively, with λm  = λn , then
                                            L
                                               φm (x)φn (x) dx = 0.
                                            0
    Hint: Note that
                                     
                                   φm   + λm φm = 0,       φn + λn φn = 0.
    Multiply the first of these equations by φn , the second by φm , and integrate from 0 to L,
    using integration by parts. Finally, subtract one equation from the other.
24. In this problem we consider a higher order eigenvalue problem. The analysis of transverse
    vibrations of a uniform elastic bar is based on the differential equation
                                                y(4) − λy = 0,
    where y is the transverse displacement and λ = mω2 /EI; m is the mass per unit length of
    the rod, E is Young’s modulus, I is the moment of inertia of the cross section about an
    axis through the centroid perpendicular to the plane of vibration, and ω is the frequency
    of vibration. Thus, for a bar whose material and geometrical properties are given, the
    eigenvalues determine the natural frequencies of vibration. Boundary conditions at each
    end are usually one of the following types:
                            y = y = 0,        clamped end,
                           y = y = 0,        simply supported or hinged end,
                               
                         y = y = 0,            free end.
    For each of the following three cases, find the form of the eigenfunctions and the equation
    satisfied by the eigenvalues of this fourth order boundary value problem. Determine
    λ1 and λ2 , the two eigenvalues of smallest magnitude. Assume that the eigenvalues are
    real and positive.
                  (a) y(0) = y (0) = 0,      y(L) = y (L) = 0
                               
                  (b) y(0) = y (0) = 0,        y(L) = y (L) = 0
                  (c) y(0) = y (0) = 0,     y (L) = y (L) = 0    (cantilevered bar)
              25. This problem illustrates that the eigenvalue parameter sometimes appears in the boundary
                  conditions as well as in the differential equation. Consider the longitudinal vibrations of a
                  uniform straight elastic bar of length L. It can be shown that the axial displacement u(x, t)
                  satisfies the partial differential equation
                                              (E/ρ)uxx = utt ;        0 < x < L,   t > 0,                    (i)
                  where E is Young’s modulus and ρ is the mass per unit volume. If the end x = 0 is fixed,
                  then the boundary condition there is
                                                        u(0, t) = 0,      t > 0.                            (ii)
                  Suppose that the end x = L is rigidly attached to a mass m but is otherwise unrestrained.
                  We can obtain the boundary condition here by writing Newton’s law for the mass. From
                  the theory of elasticity, it can be shown that the force exerted by the bar on the mass is
                  given by −EAux (L, t). Hence the boundary condition is
                                              EAux (L, t) + mutt (L, t) = 0,       t > 0.                  (iii)
                  (a) Assume that u(x, t) = X (x)T(t), and show that X (x) and T(t) satisfy the differential
                  equations
                                                                X  + λX = 0,                             (iv)
                                                             
                                                         T + λ(E/ρ)T = 0.                                   (v)
                  (b) Show that the boundary conditions are
                                              X (0) = 0,        X  (L) − γλLX (L) = 0,                    (vi)
                  where γ = m/ρAL is a dimensionless parameter that gives the ratio of the end mass to
                  the mass of the bar.
                  Hint: Use the differential equation for T(t) in simplifying the boundary condition at x = L.
                  (c) Determine the form of the eigenfunctions and the equation satisfied by the real
                  eigenvalues of Eqs. (iv) and (vi).
                  (d) Find the first two eigenvalues λ1 and λ2 if γ = 0.5.
11.2 Sturm–Liouville Boundary Value Problems
             We now consider two-point boundary value problems of the type obtained in Section
              11.1 by separating the variables in a heat conduction problem for a bar of variable
              material properties and with a source term proportional to the temperature. This
              kind of problem also occurs in many other applications.
   These boundary value problems are commonly associated with the names of Sturm
and Liouville.1 They consist of a differential equation of the form
                                    [p(x)y ] − q(x)y + λr(x)y = 0                                  (1)
on the interval 0 < x < 1, together with the boundary conditions
                         α1 y(0) + α2 y (0) = 0,         β1 y(1) + β2 y (1) = 0                    (2)
at the endpoints. It is often convenient to introduce the linear homogeneous differ-
ential operator L defined by
                                      L[y] = −[p(x)y ] + q(x)y.                                    (3)
Then the differential equation (1) can be written as
                                             L[y] = λr(x)y.                                          (4)
   We assume that the functions p, p , q, and r are continuous on the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1
and, further, that p(x) > 0 and r(x) > 0 at all points in 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. In this case the
boundary value problem is said to be regular. These assumptions are necessary to
render the theory as simple as possible while retaining considerable generality. It
turns out that these conditions are satisfied in many significant problems in math-
ematical physics. For example, the equation y + λy = 0, which arose repeatedly in
the preceding chapter, is of the form (1) with p(x) = 1, q(x) = 0, and r(x) = 1.
   The boundary conditions (2) are said to be separated; that is, each involves only one
of the boundary points. These are the most general separated boundary conditions
that are possible for a second order differential equation. Note that for the first
boundary condition to impose any restriction on y, it is necessary for at least one of
the numbers α1 and α2 to be nonzero. Similarly, at least one of the numbers β1 and
β2 must be nonzero.
   Before proceeding to establish some of the properties of the Sturm–Liouville prob-
lem (1), (2), it is necessary to derive an identity, known as Lagrange’s identity, that is
basic to the study of linear boundary value problems. Let u and v be functions having
continuous second derivatives on the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Then2
                               1                   1
                                   L[u]v dx =          [−(pu ) v + quv] dx.
                                0                   0
1 Charles-François Sturm (1803–1855) and Joseph Liouville (1809–1882), in a series of papers in 1836 and
1837, set forth many properties of the class of boundary value problems associated with their names,
including the results stated in Theorems 11.2.1 to 11.2.4. Sturm was born in Geneva, Switzerland, but
spent almost his entire adult life in Paris. He is also famous for a theorem on the number of real zeros
of a polynomial and, in addition, did extensive work in physics and mechanics. Liouville was a French
mathematician who did notable research in analysis,algebra,and number theory. One of his most important
results was the proof (in 1844) of the existence of transcendental numbers. He was also the founder, and
for 39 years the editor, of the influential Journal de mathématiques pures et appliquées.
                                               3                   3
2 For brevity, we sometimes use the notation 1 f dx rather than 1 f (x) dx in this chapter.
                                                 0                   0
Integrating the first term on the right side twice by parts, we obtain
      1                                  1                  1  1
                                                           
          L[u]v dx = −p(x)u (x)v(x)  + p(x)u(x)v (x) +                [−u(pv ) + uqv] dx
      0                                    0                   0     0
                                                          1  1
                                                          
                    = −p(x) [u (x)v(x) − u(x)v (x)]  +          uL[v] dx.
                                                           0    0
Hence, upon transposing the integral on the right side, we have
                 1
                    "                  #                                     1
                      L[u]v − uL[v] dx = −p(x) u (x)v(x) − u(x)v (x)  ,                   (5)
                 0                                                               0
which is Lagrange’s identity.
   Now let us suppose that the functions u and v in Eq. (5) also satisfy the boundary
conditions (2). Then, if we assume that α2  = 0 and β2  = 0, the right side of Eq. (5)
becomes
                                1
−p(x) u (x)v(x) − u(x)v (x) 
                                    0
                                                                             
           = −p(1) u (1)v(1) − u(1)v (1) + p(0) u (0)v(0) − u(0)v (0)
                                                                                           
                         β1               β1                        α1              α1
           = −p(1) − u(1)v(1) + u(1)v(1) + p(0) − u(0)v(0) + u(0)v(0)
                         β2               β2                        α2              α2
           = 0.
   The same result holds if either α2 or β2 is zero; the proof in this case is even simpler
and is left for you. Thus, if the differential operator L is defined by Eq. (3), and if
the functions u and v satisfy the boundary conditions (2), then Lagrange’s identity
reduces to                       1
                                      "                 #
                                        L[u]v − uL[v] dx = 0.                                (6)
                                   0
   Let us now write Eq. (6) in a slightly different way. In Eq. (4) of Section 10.2 we
introduced the inner product (u, v) of two real-valued functions u and v on a given
interval; using the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, we have
                                               1
                                     (u, v) =     u(x)v(x) dx.                               (7)
                                               0
In this notation, Eq. (6) becomes
                                    (L[u], v) − (u, L[v]) = 0.                               (8)
   In proving Theorem 11.2.1 below, it is necessary to deal with complex-valued func-
tions. By analogy with the definition in Section 7.2 for vectors, we define the inner
product of two complex-valued functions on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 as
                                               1
                                     (u, v) =     u(x)v(x) dx,                               (9)
                                               0
where v is the complex conjugate of v. Clearly, Eq. (9) coincides with Eq. (7) if u(x)
and v(x) are real. It is important to know that Eq. (8) remains valid under the stated
conditions if u and v are complex-valued functions and if the inner product is defined
                                                                   1
as in Eq. (9). To see this, you can start with the quantity            L[u]v dx and retrace the
                                                                   0
               steps leading to Eq. (6), making use of the fact that p(x), q(x), α1 , α2 , β1 , and β2 are
               all real quantities (see Problem 22).
                   We now consider some of the implications of Eq. (8) for the Sturm–Liouville
               boundary value problem (1), (2). We assume without proof 3 that this problem actu-
               ally has eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. In Theorems 11.2.1 to 11.2.4 below, we
               state several of their important, but relatively elementary, properties. Each of these
               properties is illustrated by the basic Sturm–Liouville problem
                                              y + λy = 0,         y(0) = 0,     y(1) = 0,                       (10)
               whose eigenvalues are λn = n2 π2 ,with corresponding eigenfunctions φn (x) = sin nπx.
Theorem 11.2.1 All the eigenvalues of the Sturm–Liouville problem (1), (2) are real.
                   To prove this theorem, let us suppose that λ is a (possibly complex) eigenvalue
               of the problem (1), (2) and that φ is a corresponding eigenfunction, also possibly
               complex-valued. Let us write λ = μ + iν and φ(x) = U(x) + iV(x), where μ, ν, U(x),
               and V(x) are real. Then, if we let u = φ and also v = φ in Eq. (8), we have
                                                         (L[φ], φ) = (φ, L[φ]).                                   (11)
               However, we know that L[φ] = λrφ, so Eq. (11) becomes
                                                           (λrφ, φ) = (φ, λrφ).                                   (12)
               Writing out Eq. (12) in full, using the definition (9) of the inner product, we obtain
                                           1                            1
                                              λr(x)φ(x)φ(x) dx =            φ(x)λr(x)φ(x) dx.                     (13)
                                           0                             0
               Since r(x) is real, r(x) = r(x), and Eq. (13) reduces to
                                                              1
                                                  (λ − λ)        r(x)φ(x)φ(x) dx = 0.
                                                              0
               However, φ(x)φ(x) = U (x) + V (x), so we have
                                               2           2
                                                        1
                                             (λ − λ)         r(x)[U 2 (x) + V 2 (x)] dx = 0.                      (14)
                                                         0
               The integrand in Eq. (14) is nonnegative and not identically zero. Since the inte-
               grand is also continuous, it follows that the integral is positive. Therefore, the factor
               λ − λ = 2iν must be zero. Hence ν = 0 and λ is real, so the theorem is proved.
                   An important consequence of Theorem 11.2.1 is that in finding eigenvalues and
               eigenfunctions of a Sturm–Liouville boundary value problem, we need look only for
               real eigenvalues. Recall that this is what we did in Chapter 10. It is also possible to
               show that the eigenfunctions of the boundary value problem (1), (2) are real. A proof
               is sketched in Problem 23.
               3 For a proof of this statement, see the books by Sagan (Chapter 5) or by Birkhoff and Rota (Chapter 10)
               listed in the references at the end of this chapter.
Theorem 11.2.2 If φm and φn are two eigenfunctions of the Sturm–Liouville problem (1), (2)
               corresponding to eigenvalues λm and λn , respectively, and if λm  = λn , then
                                               1
                                                  r(x)φm (x)φn (x) dx = 0.                        (15)
                                               0
                 This theorem expresses the property of orthogonality of the eigenfunctions with
               respect to the weight function r. To prove the theorem, we note that φm and φn satisfy
               the differential equations
                                                     L[φm ] = λm rφm                                (16)
               and
                                                     L[φn ] = λn rφn ,                              (17)
               respectively. If we let u = φm , let v = φn , and substitute for L[u] and L[v] in Eq. (8),
               we obtain
                                            (λm rφm , φn ) − (φm , λn rφn ) = 0,
               or, using Eq. (9),
                                   1                           1
                              λm      r(x)φm (x)φn (x) dx − λn      φm (x)r(x)φn (x) dx = 0.
                                   0                             0
               Because λn , r(x), and φn (x) are real, this equation becomes
                                                     1
                                         (λm − λn )      r(x)φm (x)φn (x) dx = 0.                   (18)
                                                      0
               Since by hypothesis λm  = λn , it follows that φm and φn must satisfy Eq. (15), and the
               theorem is proved.
Theorem 11.2.3 The eigenvalues of the Sturm–Liouville problem (1), (2) are all simple; that is, to
               each eigenvalue there corresponds only one linearly independent eigenfunction.
               Further, the eigenvalues form an infinite sequence and can be ordered according
               to increasing magnitude so that
                                           λ1 < λ2 < λ3 < · · · < λn < · · · .
               Moreover, λn → ∞ as n → ∞.
                 The proof of this theorem is somewhat more advanced than those of the two
               previous theorems and will be omitted. However, a proof that the eigenvalues are
               simple is outlined in Problem 20.
                 Again we note that all the properties stated in Theorems 11.2.1 to 11.2.3 are
               exemplified by the eigenvalues λn = n2 π2 and eigenfunctions φn (x) = sin nπx of the
               example problem (10). Clearly, the eigenvalues are real. The eigenfunctions satisfy
               the orthogonality relation
                             1                     1
                                φm (x)φn (x) dx =       sin mπx sin nπx dx = 0,        m  = n,     (19)
                             0                      0
        which was established in Section 10.2 by direct integration. Further, the eigenval-
        ues can be ordered so that λ1 < λ2 < · · · , and λn → ∞ as n → ∞. Finally, to each
        eigenvalue there corresponds a single linearly independent eigenfunction.
           We will now assume that the eigenvalues of the Sturm–Liouville problem (1),
        (2) are ordered as indicated in Theorem 11.2.3. Associated with the eigenvalue λn
        is a corresponding eigenfunction φn , determined up to a multiplicative constant.
        It is often convenient to choose the arbitrary constant multiplying each eigenfunction
        so as to satisfy the condition
                                        1
                                             r(x)φn2 (x) dx = 1,         n = 1, 2, . . . .                   (20)
                                         0
        Equation (20) is called a normalization condition, and eigenfunctions satisfying this
        condition are said to be normalized. Indeed, in this case, the eigenfunctions are said
        to form an orthonormal set (with respect to the weight function r) since they already
        satisfy the orthogonality relation (15). It is sometimes useful to combine Eqs. (15)
        and (20) into a single equation. To this end we introduce the symbol δmn , which is
        known as the Kronecker4 delta and defined by
                                                          
                                                            0, if m  = n,
                                                 δmn =                                                       (21)
                                                            1, if m = n.
        Making use of the Kronecker delta, we can write Eqs. (15) and (20) as
                                               1
                                                  r(x)φm (x)φn (x) dx = δmn .                                (22)
                                               0
        Determine the normalized eigenfunctions of the problem (10):
EXAMPLE
                                          y + λy = 0,        y(0) = 0,   y(1) = 0.
   1
           The eigenvalues of this problem are λ1 = π2 , λ2 = 4π2 , . . . , λn = n2 π2 , . . . , and the corre-
        sponding eigenfunctions are k1 sin πx, k2 sin 2πx, . . . , kn sin nπx, . . . , respectively. In this case
        the weight function is r(x) = 1. To satisfy Eq. (20), we must choose kn so that
                                                   1
                                                       (kn sin nπx)2 dx = 1                                  (23)
                                                     0
        for each value of n. Since
                                     1                      1
                                                                1 1              
                                kn2     sin2 nπx dx = kn2         2
                                                                    − 2 cos 2nπx dx = 21 kn2 ,
                                     0                       0
                                                             √
        Eq. (23) is satisfied if kn is chosen to be 2 for each value of n. Hence the normalized
        eigenfunctions of the given boundary value problem are
                                                   √
                                         φn (x) = 2 sin nπx,          n = 1, 2, 3, . . . .                   (24)
        4The German mathematician Leopold Kronecker (1823–1891), a student of Dirichlet, was associated with
        the University of Berlin for most of his life, although (since he was independently wealthy) he held a
        faculty position only from 1883 onward. He worked in number theory, elliptic functions, algebra, and their
        interconnections.
        Determine the normalized eigenfunctions of the problem
EXAMPLE
                                   y + λy = 0,        y(0) = 0,      y (1) + y(1) = 0.             (25)
   2
           In Example 1 of Section 11.1, we found that the eigenvalues λn satisfy the equation
                                                                    
                                             sin λn + λn cos λn = 0                                   (26)
        and that the corresponding eigenfunctions are
                                                                    
                                                  φn (x) = kn sin λn x,                               (27)
        where kn is arbitrary. We can determine kn from the normalization condition (20). Since
        r(x) = 1 in this problem, we have
                     1                   1       
                        φn2 (x) dx = kn2     sin2 λn x dx
                      0                    0
                                          1                                                  √   1
                                                                                  x sin 2 λn x    
                                                                                                   
                                   = kn2       1
                                                  − 21 cos 2    λn x dx = kn2         −        √   
                                           0
                                               2
                                                                                   2          4 λn 
                                                                                                    0
                                           √             √             √           √           √
                                         2 λn − sin 2 λn                  λn − sin λn cos λn
                                   = kn2          √             = kn2              √
                                                 4 λn                            2 λn
                                                    √
                                         1 + cos2 λn
                                   = kn2                  ,
                                                 2
        where in the last step we have used Eq. (26). Hence, to normalize the eigenfunctions φn , we
        must choose
                                                                          1/2
                                                                2
                                               kn =                √           .                      (28)
                                                        1 + cos2 λn
        The normalized eigenfunctions of the given problem are
                                                 √       √
                                                   2 sin λn x
                                    φn (x) =               √        ;       n = 1, 2, . . . .         (29)
                                              (1 + cos2 λn )1/2
           We now turn to the question of expressing a given function f as a series of eigen-
        functions of the Sturm–Liouville problem (1), (2). We have already seen examples
        of such expansions in Sections 10.2 to 10.4. For example, it was shown there that if
        f is continuous and has a piecewise continuous derivative on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and satisfies
        the boundary conditions f (0) = f (1) = 0, then f can be expanded in a Fourier sine
        series of the form
                                                           ∞
                                                f (x) =         bn sin nπx.                           (30)
                                                           n=1
        The functions sin nπx, n = 1, 2, . . . , are precisely the eigenfunctions of the boundary
        value problem (10). The coefficients bn are given by
                                                        1
                                             bn = 2          f (x) sin nπx dx                         (31)
                                                         0
               and the series (30) converges for each x in 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. In a similar way, f can be
               expanded in a Fourier cosine series using the eigenfunctions cos nπx, n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
               of the boundary value problem y + λy = 0, y (0) = 0, y (1) = 0.
                  Now suppose that a given function f ,satisfying suitable conditions,can be expanded
               in an infinite series of eigenfunctions of the more general Sturm–Liouville problem
               (1), (2). If this can be done, then we have
                                                                    ∞
                                                           f (x) =      cn φn (x),                            (32)
                                                                    n=1
               where the functions φn (x) satisfy Eqs. (1), (2) and also the orthonormality condition
               (22). To compute the coefficients in the series (32), we multiply Eq. (32) by r(x)φm (x),
               where m is a fixed positive integer, and integrate from x = 0 to x = 1. Assuming that
               the series can be integrated term by term, we obtain
                            1                               ∞      1                          ∞
                                  r(x)f (x)φm (x) dx =           cn     r(x)φm (x)φn (x) dx =        cn δmn . (33)
                             0                               n=1     0                          n=1
               By the definition of δmn the last sum in Eq. (33) reduces to the single term cm . Hence,
               using the definition of the inner product, we have
                                              1
                                   cm =          r(x)f (x)φm (x) dx = (f , rφm ),      m = 1, 2, . . . .      (34)
                                               0
               The coefficients in the series (32) have thus been formally determined. Equation (34)
               has the same structure as the Euler–Fourier formulas for the coefficients in a Fourier
               series, and the eigenfunction series (32) also has convergence properties similar to
               those of Fourier series. The following theorem is analogous to Theorem 10.3.1.
Theorem 11.2.4 Let φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φn , . . . be the normalized eigenfunctions of the Sturm–Liouville
               problem (1), (2):
                                                    [p(x)y ] − q(x)y + λr(x)y = 0,
                                        α1 y(0) + α2 y (0) = 0,         β1 y(1) + β2 y (1) = 0.
               Let f and f  be piecewise continuous on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Then the series (32) whose
               coefficients cm are given by Eq. (34) converges to [f (x+) + f (x−)]/2 at each point
               in the open interval 0 < x < 1.
                  If f satisfies further conditions, then a stronger conclusion can be established.
               Suppose that, in addition to the hypotheses of Theorem 11.2.4, the function f is
               continuous on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. If α2 = 0 in the first of Eqs. (2) [so that φn (0) = 0], then
               assume that f (0) = 0. Similarly, if β2 = 0 in the second of Eqs. (2), assume that
               f (1) = 0. Otherwise, no boundary conditions need be prescribed for f . Then the
               series (32) converges to f (x) at each point in the closed interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.
        Expand the function
EXAMPLE                                         f (x) = x,        0≤x≤1                             (35)
   3
        in terms of the normalized eigenfunctions φn (x) of the problem (25).
           In Example 2 we found the normalized eigenfunctions to be
                                                                    
                                                  φn (x) = kn sin λn x,                             (36)
        where kn is given by Eq. (28) and λn satisfies Eq. (26). To find the expansion for f in terms of
        the eigenfunctions φn , we write
                                                             ∞
                                                   f (x) =       cn φn (x),                         (37)
                                                             n=1
        where the coefficients are given by Eq. (34). Thus
                                        1                            1        
                                  cn =       f (x)φn (x) dx = kn         x sin λn x dx.
                                         0                            0
        Integrating by parts, we obtain
                                                 √              √                   √
                                             sin λn         cos λn              2 sin λn
                                 cn = kn                − √              = kn            ,
                                                 λn              λn                 λn
        where we have used Eq. (26) in the last step. Upon substituting for kn from Eq. (28), we obtain
                                                            √       √
                                                          2 2 sin λn
                                              cn =                   √        .                     (38)
                                                      λn (1 + cos2 λn )1/2
        Thus
                                                                √         √
                                                       ∞
                                                            sin   λn sin λn x
                                          f (x) = 4                        √      .                 (39)
                                                       n=1 n
                                                            λ (1 + cos2 λn )
        Observe that although the right side of Eq. (39) is a series of sines, it is not included in the
        discussion of Fourier sine series in Section 10.4.
        Self-Adjoint Problems. Sturm–Liouville boundary value problems are of great impor-
        tance in their own right, but they can also be viewed as belonging to a much more
        extensive class of problems that have many of the same properties. For example, there
        are many similarities between Sturm–Liouville problems and the algebraic system
                                                        Ax = λx,                                    (40)
        where the n × n matrix A is real symmetric or Hermitian. Comparing the results
        mentioned in Section 7.3 with those of this section, we note that in both cases the
        eigenvalues are real, and the eigenfunctions or eigenvectors form an orthogonal set.
        Further, the eigenfunctions or eigenvectors can be used as the basis for expressing
        an essentially arbitrary function or vector, respectively, as a sum. The most important
        difference is that a matrix has only a finite number of eigenvalues and eigenvectors,
        while a Sturm–Liouville problem has infinitely many. It is interesting and of fun-
        damental importance in mathematics that these seemingly different problems—the
matrix problem (40) and the Sturm–Liouville problem (1), (2)—which arise in dif-
ferent ways, are actually parts of a single underlying theory. This theory is usually
referred to as linear operator theory and is part of the subject of functional analysis.
   We now point out some ways in which Sturm–Liouville problems can be gen-
eralized, while still preserving the main results of Theorems 11.2.1 to 11.2.4—the
existence of a sequence of real eigenvalues tending to infinity, the orthogonality of
the eigenfunctions, and the possibility of expressing an arbitrary function as a series
of eigenfunctions. These generalizations depend on the continued validity of the
crucial relation (8).
   Let us consider the boundary value problem consisting of the differential equation
                             L[y] = λr(x)y,          0 < x < 1,                      (41)
where
                                     dn y                  dy
                       L[y] = Pn (x)      + · · · + P1 (x)    + P0 (x)y,             (42)
                                     dxn                   dx
and n linear homogeneous boundary conditions at the endpoints. If Eq. (8) is valid for
every pair of sufficiently differentiable functions that satisfy the boundary conditions,
then the given problem is said to be self-adjoint. It is important to observe that Eq. (8)
involves restrictions on both the differential equation and the boundary conditions.
The differential operator L must be such that the same operator appears in both terms
of Eq (8). This requires L to be of even order. Further, a second order operator must
have the form (3), a fourth order operator must have the form
                           L[y] = [p(x)y ] − [q(x)y ] + s(x)y,                 (43)
and higher order operators must have an analogous structure. In addition, the bound-
ary conditions must be such as to eliminate the boundary terms that arise during the
integration by parts used in deriving Eq. (8). For example, in a second order problem,
this is true for the separated boundary conditions (2) and also in certain other cases,
one of which is given in Example 4 below.
   Let us suppose that we have a self-adjoint boundary value problem for Eq. (41),
where L[y] is given now by Eq. (43). We assume that p, q, r, and s are continuous on
0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and that the derivatives of p and q indicated in Eq. (43) are also continuous.
If in addition p(x) > 0 and r(x) > 0 for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, then there is an infinite sequence
of real eigenvalues tending to +∞, the eigenfunctions are orthogonal with respect
to the weight function r, and an arbitrary function can be expressed as a series of
eigenfunctions. However, the eigenvalues may not be simple in these more general
problems.
   We turn now to the relation between Sturm–Liouville problems and Fourier series.
We have noted previously that Fourier sine and cosine series can be obtained by using
the eigenfunctions of certain Sturm–Liouville problems involving the differential
equation y + λy = 0. This raises the question of whether we can obtain a full Fourier
series, including both sine and cosine terms, by choosing a suitable set of boundary
conditions. The answer is provided by the following example, which also serves to
illustrate the occurrence of nonseparated boundary conditions.
         Find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the boundary value problem
 EXAMPLE
                                                          y + λy = 0,                                     (44)
    4
                                                                               
                                        y(−L) − y(L) = 0,           y (−L) − y (L) = 0.                     (45)
            This is not a Sturm–Liouville problem because the boundary conditions are not separated.
         The boundary conditions (45) are called periodic boundary conditions since they require that
         y and y assume the same values at x = L as at x = −L. Nevertheless, it is straightforward to
         show that the problem (44), (45) is self-adjoint. A simple calculation establishes that λ0 = 0 is
         an eigenvalue and that the corresponding eigenfunction is φ0 (x) = 1. Further, there are addi-
         tional eigenvalues λ1 = (π/L)2 , λ2 = (2π/L)2 , . . . , λn = (nπ/L)2 , . . . . To each of these nonzero
         eigenvalues there correspond two linearly independent eigenfunctions; for example, corre-
         sponding to λn are the two eigenfunctions φn (x) = cos(nπx/L) and ψn (x) = sin(nπx/L). This
         illustrates that the eigenvalues may not be simple when the boundary conditions are not sepa-
         rated. Further, if we seek to expand a given function f of period 2L in a series of eigenfunctions
         of the problem (44), (45), we obtain the series
                                               a0 
                                                       ∞
                                                                    nπx            nπx
                                       f (x) =     +         an cos       + bn sin      ,
                                               2      n=1
                                                                     L              L
         which is just the Fourier series for f .
            We will not give further consideration to problems that have nonseparated bound-
         ary conditions, nor will we deal with problems of higher than second order, except in
         a few problems. There is, however, one other kind of generalization that we do wish
         to discuss. That is the case in which the coefficients p, q, and r in Eq. (1) do not quite
         satisfy the rather strict continuity and positivity requirements laid down at the begin-
         ning of this section. Such problems are called singular Sturm–Liouville problems and
         are the subject of Section 11.4.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 5, determine the normalized eigenfunctions of the given
         problem.
           1. y + λy = 0,        y(0) = 0,    y (1) = 0
           2. y + λy = 0,        y (0) = 0,   y(1) = 0
                                  
           3. y + λy = 0,          y (0) = 0,    y (1) = 0
           4. y + λy = 0,        y (0) = 0,   y (1) + y(1) = 0;      see Section 11.1, Problem 8.
                     
           5. y − 2y + (1 + λ)y = 0,            y(0) = 0,       y(1) = 0;    see Section 11.1, Problem 17.
         In each of Problems 6 through 9, find the coefficients in the eigenfunction expansion
         ∞
             an φn (x) of the given function, using the normalized eigenfunctions of Problem 1.
         n=1
           6. f (x) = 1,      0≤x≤1                                7. f (x) = x,     0≤x≤1
                                                                             
                         1,     0 ≤ x < 21                                      2x,     0 ≤ x < 21
           8. f (x) =                                              9. f (x) =
                         0,      1
                                 2
                                   ≤x≤1                                         1,      1
                                                                                        2
                                                                                          ≤x≤1
In each of Problems 10 through 13, find the coefficients in the eigenfunction expansion
∞
    an φn (x) of the given function, using the normalized eigenfunctions of Problem 4.
n=1
10. f (x) = 1,        0≤x≤1                           11. f (x) = x,       0≤x≤1
                                                                   
                                                                      1,     0 ≤ x < 21
12. f (x) = 1 − x,        0≤x≤1                       13. f (x) =
                                                                      0,      1
                                                                              2
                                                                                ≤x≤1
In each of Problems 14 through 18, determine whether the given boundary value problem is
self-adjoint.
14. y + y + 2y = 0,        y(0) = 0,      y(1) = 0
15. (1 + x2 )y + 2xy + y = 0,         y (0) = 0,   y(1) + 2y (1) = 0
                                               
16. y + y = λy,          y(0) − y (1) = 0,      y (0) − y(1) = 0
17. (1 + x2 )y + 2xy + y = λ(1 + x2 )y,          y(0) − y (1) = 0,   y (0) + 2y(1) = 0
                                               
18. y + λy = 0,          y(0) = 0,    y(π) + y (π) = 0
19. Show that if the functions u and v satisfy Eqs. (2), and either α2 = 0 or β2 = 0, or both,
     then
                                                                   1
                                    p(x) u (x)v(x) − u(x)v (x)  = 0.
                                                                       0
20. In this problem we outline a proof of the first part of Theorem 11.2.3: that the eigenvalues
     of the Sturm–Liouville problem (1), (2) are simple. The proof is by contradiction.
     (a) Suppose that a given eigenvalue λ is not simple. Then there exist two corresponding
     eigenfunctions φ1 and φ2 that are linearly independent—that is, not multiples of each
     other.
     (b) Compute the Wronskian W(φ1 , φ2 )(x), and use the boundary conditions (2) to show
     that W(φ1 , φ2 )(0) = 0.
     (c) Use Theorem 3.2.7 to reach a contradiction, which establishes that the eigenvalues
     must be simple, as asserted in Theorem 11.2.3.
21. Consider the Sturm–Liouville problem
                                        −[p(x)y ] + q(x)y = λr(x)y,
                             α1 y(0) + α2 y (0) = 0,      β1 y(1) + β2 y (1) = 0,
     where p, q, and r satisfy the conditions stated in the text.
     (a) Show that if λ is an eigenvalue and φ a corresponding eigenfunction, then
                       1            1
                                                              β1                α1
                    λ     rφ2 dx =      (pφ2 + qφ2 ) dx +       p(1)φ2 (1) − p(0)φ2 (0),
                       0             0                        β2                α2
     provided that α2  = 0 and β2  = 0. How must this result be modified if α2 = 0 or β2 = 0?
     (b) Show that if q(x) ≥ 0 and if β1 /β2 and −α1 /α2 are nonnegative, then the eigenvalue λ
     is nonnegative.
     (c) Under the conditions of part (b), show that the eigenvalue λ is strictly positive unless
     α1 = β1 = 0 and q(x) = 0 for each x in 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.
22. Derive Eq. (8) using the inner product (9) and assuming that u and v are complex-valued
     functions.                       1
     Hint: Consider the quantity          L[u]v dx, split u and v into real and imaginary parts, and
                                       0
     proceed as in the text.
23. In this problem we outline a proof that the eigenfunctions of the Sturm–Liouville problem
     (1), (2) are real.
     (a) Let λ be an eigenvalue and let φ(x) = U(x) + iV(x) be a corresponding eigenfunction.
     Show that U and V are also eigenfunctions corresponding to λ.
     (b) Using Theorem 11.2.3, or the result of Problem 20, show that U and V are linearly
     dependent.
     (c) Show that φ must be real, apart from an arbitrary multiplicative constant that may be
     complex.
24. Consider the problem
                                x2 y = λ(xy − y),        y(1) = 0,  y(2) = 0.
                                                        
     Note that λ appears as a coefficient of y as well as of y itself. It is possible to extend
     the definition of self-adjointness to this type of problem and to show that this particular
     problem is not self-adjoint. Show that the problem has eigenvalues but that none of them
     is real. This illustrates that in general, nonself-adjoint problems may have eigenvalues that
     are not real.
Buckling of an Elastic Column. An investigation of the buckling of a uniform elastic column
of length L by an axial load P (Figure 11.2.1a) leads to the differential equation
                                       y(4) + λy = 0,      0 < x < L.                         (i)
              y                                                 y
         P
                                                          x                          L    x
              x=0                            x=L
                              (a)                                             (b)
    FIGURE 11.2.1         (a) A column under compression. (b) Shape of the buckled column.
  The parameter λ is equal to P/EI, where E is Young’s modulus and I is the moment of
inertia of the cross section about an axis through the centroid perpendicular to the xy-plane.
The boundary conditions at x = 0 and x = L depend on how the ends of the column are
supported. Typical boundary conditions are
                           y = y = 0,          clamped end,
                                 
                           y = y = 0,           simply supported (hinged) end.
The bar shown in Figure 11.2.1a is simply supported at x = 0 and clamped at x = L. It is
desired to determine the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of Eq. (i) subject to suitable boundary
conditions. In particular, the smallest eigenvalue λ1 gives the load at which the column buckles,
or can assume a curved equilibrium position, as shown in Figure 11.2.1b. The corresponding
eigenfunction describes the configuration of the buckled column. Note that the differential
equation (i) does not fall within the theory discussed in this section. It is possible to show,
however, that in each of the cases given here all the eigenvalues are real and positive. Problems
25 and 26 deal with column-buckling problems.
25. For each of the following boundary conditions, find the smallest eigenvalue (the buckling
    load) of y(4) + λy = 0, and also find the corresponding eigenfunction (the shape of the
    buckled column).
    (a) y(0) = y (0) = 0,       y(L) = y (L) = 0
                  
    (b) y(0) = y (0) = 0,         y(L) = y (L) = 0
    (c) y(0) = y (0) = 0,        y(L) = y (L) = 0
26. In some buckling problems the eigenvalue parameter appears in the boundary conditions
    as well as in the differential equation. One such case occurs when one end of the column
    is clamped and the other end is free. In this case the differential equation y(4) + λy = 0
    must be solved subject to the boundary conditions
                  y(0) = 0,       y (0) = 0,       y (L) = 0,     y (L) + λy (L) = 0.
    Find the smallest eigenvalue and the corresponding eigenfunction.
27. Solutes in an aquifer are transported by two separate mechanisms. The process by which
    a solute is transported by the bulk motion of the flowing groundwater is called advection.
    In addition, the solute is spread by small-scale fluctuations in the groundwater velocity
    along the tortuous flow paths within individual pores, a process called mechanical disper-
    sion. The one-dimensional form of the advection–dispersion equation for a nonreactive
    dissolved solute in a saturated, homogeneous, isotropic porous medium under steady,
    uniform flow is
                               ct + vcx = Dcxx ,           0 < x < L, t > 0,                     (i)
    where c(x, t) is the concentration of the solute, v is the average linear groundwater velocity,
    D is the coefficient of hydrodynamic dispersion, and L is the length of the aquifer. Suppose
    that the boundary conditions are
                                 c(0, t) = 0,       cx (L, t) = 0,      t>0                     (ii)
    and that the initial condition is
                                       c(x, 0) = f (x),       0 < x < L,                       (iii)
    where f (x) is the given initial concentration of the solute.
    (a) Assume that c(x, t) = X (x)T(t), use the method of separation of variables, and find
    the equations satisfied by X (x) and T(t), respectively. Show that the problem for X (x) can
    be written in the Sturm–Liouville form
                              [p(x)X  ] + λr(x)X = 0,           0 < x < L,                   (iv)
                                                         
                                   X (0) = 0,         X (L) = 0,                                (v)
    where p(x) = r(x) = exp(−vx/D). Hence the eigenvalues are real, and the eigenfunctions
    are orthogonal with respect to the weight function r(x).
    (b) Let μ2 = λ − (v2 /4D2 ). Show that the eigenfunctions are
                                           Xn (x) = evx/2D sin μn x,                           (vi)
    where μn satisfies the equation
                                             tan μL = −2Dμ/v.                                 (vii)
    (c) Show graphically that Eq. (vii) has an infinite sequence of positive roots and that
    μn ∼= (2n − 1)π/2L for large n.
                  (d) Show that                 L
                                                                     L        v
                                                    r(x)Xn2 (x) dx =     +        sin2 μn L.
                                                 0                    2     4Dμ2n
                  (e) Find a formal solution of the problem (i), (ii), (iii) in terms of a series of the
                  eigenfunctions Xn (x).
                  (f) Let v = 1, D = 0.5, L = 10, and f (x) = δ(x − 3), where δ is the Dirac delta5 function.
                  Using the solution found in part (e), plot c(x, t) versus x for several values of t, such as
                  t = 0.5, 1, 3, 6, and 10. Also plot c(x, t) versus t for several values of x. Note that the number
                  of terms that are needed to obtain an accurate plot depends strongly on the values of t
                  and x.
                  (g) Describe in a few words how the solution evolves as time advances.
             28. A nonreactive tracer at concentration c0 is continuously introduced into a steady flow at
                  the upstream end of a column of length L packed with a homogeneous granular medium.
                  Assuming that the tracer concentration in the column is initially zero, the boundary value
                  problem that models this process is
                                               ct + vcx = Dcxx ,       0 < x < L,     t > 0,
                                                  c(0, t) = c0 ,       t > 0,
                                                cx (L, t) = 0,         t > 0,
                                                 c(x, 0) = 0,          0 < x < L,
                  where c(x, t), v, and D are as in Problem 27.
                  (a) Assuming that c(x, t) = c0 + u(x, t), find the boundary value problem satisfied by
                  u(x, t).
                  (b) Proceeding as in Problem 27, find u(x, t) in terms of an eigenfunction expansion.
                  (c) Let v = 1, D = 0.5, c0 = 1, and L = 10. Plot c(x, t) versus x for several values of t, and
                  also plot c(x, t) versus t for several values of x.
                  (d) Describe in a few words how the solution evolves with time. For example, about how
                  long does it take for the steady state solution to be essentially attained?
11.3 Nonhomogeneous Boundary Value Problems
             In this section we discuss how to solve nonhomogeneous boundary value problems
             for both ordinary and partial differential equations. Most of our attention is directed
             toward problems in which the differential equation alone is nonhomogeneous, while
             the boundary conditions are homogeneous. We assume that the solution can be
             expanded in a series of eigenfunctions of a related homogeneous problem, and then
             we determine the coefficients in this series so that the nonhomogeneous problem
             is satisfied. We first describe this method as it applies to boundary value problems
             for second order linear ordinary differential equations. Later we illustrate its use for
             partial differential equations by solving a heat conduction problem in a bar with
             variable material properties and in the presence of source terms.
             5 See Section 6.5, especially Eq. (16) of that section.
Nonhomogeneous Sturm–Liouville Problems. Consider the boundary value problem con-
sisting of the nonhomogeneous differential equation
                     L[y] = −[p(x)y ] + q(x)y = μr(x)y + f (x),                            (1)
where μ is a given constant and f is a given function on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and the boundary
conditions
                   α1 y(0) + α2 y (0) = 0,             β1 y(1) + β2 y (1) = 0.             (2)
As in Section 11.2, we assume that p, p , q, and r are continuous on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and
that p(x) > 0 and r(x) > 0 there. We will solve the problem (1), (2) by making use
of the eigenfunctions of the corresponding homogeneous problem consisting of the
differential equation
                                         L[y] = λr(x)y                                       (3)
and the boundary conditions (2). Let λ1 < λ2 < · · · < λn < · · · be the eigenvalues
of this problem, and let φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φn , . . . be the corresponding normalized eigen-
functions.
   We now assume that the solution y = φ(x) of the nonhomogeneous problem (1),
(2) can be expressed as a series of the form
                                                  ∞
                                    φ(x) =             bn φn (x).                            (4)
                                                 n=1
From Eq. (34) of Section 11.2, we know that
                             1
                     bn =       r(x)φ(x)φn (x) dx,              n = 1, 2, . . . .            (5)
                             0
However, since we do not know φ(x), we cannot use Eq. (5) to calculate bn . Instead,
we will try to determine bn so that the problem (1), (2) is satisfied and then use
Eq. (4) to find φ(x). Note first that φ as given by Eq. (4) always satisfies the boundary
conditions (2) since each φn does.
   Now consider the differential equation that φ must satisfy. This is just Eq. (1) with
y replaced by φ:
                               L[φ](x) = μr(x)φ(x) + f (x).                                  (6)
We substitute the series (4) into the differential equation (6) and attempt to determine
bn so that the differential equation is satisfied. The term on the left side of Eq. (6)
becomes
                          ∞
                                                 ∞                     ∞
                                                                    
          L[φ](x) = L        bn φn (x) =              bn L[φn ](x) =       bn λn r(x)φn (x), (7)
                         n=1                    n=1                   n=1
where we have assumed that we can interchange the operations of summation and
differentiation.
   Note that the function r appears in Eq. (7) and also in the term μr(x)φ(x) in Eq. (6).
This suggests that we rewrite the nonhomogeneous term in Eq. (6) as r(x)[f (x)/r(x)]
so that r(x) also appears as a multiplier in this term. If the function f /r satisfies the
conditions of Theorem 11.2.4, then
                                                 ∞
                                        f (x) 
                                             =      cn φn (x),                                 (8)
                                        r(x)
                                                n=1
where, using Eq. (5) with φ replaced by f /r,
                   1                           1
                            f (x)
            cn =      r(x)        φn (x) dx =      f (x)φn (x) dx,          n = 1, 2, . . . .  (9)
                    0       r(x)                0
Upon substituting for φ(x), L[φ](x), and f (x) in Eq. (6) from Eqs. (4), (7), and (8),
respectively, we find that
                ∞                              ∞                        ∞
                    bn λn r(x)φn (x) = μr(x)        bn φn (x) + r(x)          cn φn (x).
                n=1                             n=1                       n=1
After collecting terms and canceling the common nonzero factor r(x), we have
                                ∞
                                                       
                                      (λn − μ)bn − cn φn (x) = 0.                             (10)
                                n=1
If Eq. (10) is to hold for each x in the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, then the coefficient of φn (x)
must be zero for each n; see Problem 14 for a proof of this fact. Hence
                           (λn − μ)bn − cn = 0,            n = 1, 2, . . . .                  (11)
We must now distinguish two main cases, one of which also has two subcases.
   First suppose that μ  = λn for n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ; that is, μ is not equal to any eigen-
value of the corresponding homogeneous problem. Then
                                          cn
                               bn =          ,       n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ,                     (12)
                                      λn − μ
and
                                               ∞
                                                       cn
                                 y = φ(x) =                  φn (x).                          (13)
                                                    λn − μ
                                               n=1
Equation (13), with cn given by Eq. (9), is a formal solution of the nonhomogeneous
boundary value problem (1), (2). Our argument does not prove that the series (13)
converges. However, any solution of the boundary value problem (1), (2) clearly
satisfies the conditions of Theorem 11.2.4; indeed, it satisfies the more stringent con-
ditions given in the paragraph following that theorem. Thus it is reasonable to expect
that the series (13) does converge at each point, and this fact can be established,
provided, for example, that f is continuous.
   Now suppose that μ is equal to one of the eigenvalues of the corresponding homo-
geneous problem, say, μ = λm ; then the situation is quite different. In this event, for
n = m, Eq. (11) has the form 0 · bm − cm = 0. Again we must consider two cases.
   If μ = λm and cm  = 0, then there is no value of bm that satisfies Eq. (11), and
therefore the nonhomogeneous problem (1), (2) has no solution.
   If μ = λm and cm = 0, then Eq. (11) is satisfied regardless of the value of bm ; in
other words, bm remains arbitrary. In this case the boundary value problem (1), (2)
               does have a solution, but it is not unique, since it contains an arbitrary multiple of
               the eigenfunction φm .
                  Since cm is given by Eq. (9), the condition cm = 0 means that
                                                      1
                                                          f (x)φm (x) dx = 0.                                       (14)
                                                       0
               Thus, if μ = λm , the nonhomogeneous boundary value problem (1), (2) can be solved
               only if f is orthogonal to the eigenfunction corresponding to the eigenvalue λm .
                  The results we have formally obtained are summarized in the following theorem.
Theorem 11.3.1 The nonhomogeneous boundary value problem (1), (2) has a unique solution for
               each continuous f whenever μ is different from all the eigenvalues of the corre-
               sponding homogeneous problem; the solution is given by Eq. (13), and the series
               converges for each x in 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. If μ is equal to an eigenvalue λm of the correspond-
               ing homogeneous problem, then the nonhomogeneous boundary value problem has
               no solution unless condition (14) holds; that is, unless f is orthogonal to φm . In that
               case, the solution is not unique and contains an arbitrary multiple of φm (x).
                  The main part of Theorem 11.3.1 is sometimes stated in the following way:
Theorem 11.3.2 For a given value of μ, either the nonhomogeneous problem (1), (2) has a unique
               solution for each continuous f (if μ is not equal to any eigenvalue λm of the corre-
               sponding homogeneous problem), or else the homogeneous problem (3), (2) has a
               nontrivial solution (the eigenfunction corresponding to λm ).
                  This latter form of the theorem is known as the Fredholm6 alternative theorem.This
               is one of the basic theorems of mathematical analysis and occurs in many different
               contexts. You may be familiar with it in connection with sets of linear algebraic
               equations where the vanishing or nonvanishing of the determinant of coefficients
               replaces the statements about μ and λm . See the discussion in Section 7.3.
               Solve the boundary value problem
  EXAMPLE
                                                           y + 2y = −x,                                            (15)
      1
                                                  y(0) = 0,       y(1) + y (1) = 0.                                 (16)
               6The Swedish mathematician Erik Ivar Fredholm (1866–1927), professor at the University of Stockholm,
               established the modern theory of integral equations in a fundamental paper in 1903. Fredholm’s work
               emphasized the similarities between integral equations and systems of linear algebraic equations. There
               are also many interrelations between differential and integral equations; for example, see Section 2.8 and
               Problem 22 of Section 6.6.
   This particular problem can be solved directly in an elementary way and has the solution
                                                    √
                                                sin 2 x                x
                                   y=       √       √        √ − .                           (17)
                                        sin 2 + 2 cos 2 2
The method of solution described below illustrates the use of eigenfunction expansions, a
method that can be employed in many problems not accessible by elementary procedures.
   We begin by rewriting Eq. (15) as
                                             −y = 2y + x                                   (18)
so that it will have the same form as Eq. (1). We seek the solution of the given problem as a
series of normalized eigenfunctions φn of the corresponding homogeneous problem
                          y + λy = 0,       y(0) = 0,      y(1) + y (1) = 0.              (19)
These eigenfunctions were found in Example 2 of Section 11.2 and are
                                                         
                                        φn (x) = kn sin λn x,                                (20)
where
                                                                1/2
                                                      2
                                      kn =               √                                   (21)
                                               1 + cos2 λn
and λn satisfies
                                                         
                                    sin λn + λn cos λn = 0.                                  (22)
Recall that in Example 1 of Section 11.1, we found that
                                    λ1 ∼
                                       = 4.116,         λ2 ∼= 24.14,
                    λ3 ∼
                       = 63.66,       λn ∼
                                         = (2n − 1)2 π2 /4          for n = 4, 5, . . . .
   We assume that y is given by Eq. (4)
                                                 ∞
                                           y=        bn φn (x),
                                                 n=1
and it follows that the coefficients bn are found from Eq. (12)
                                                      cn
                                             bn =           ,
                                                    λn − 2
where the cn are the expansion coefficients of the nonhomogeneous term f (x) = x in Eq. (18)
in terms of the eigenfunctions φn . These coefficients were found in Example 3 of Section 11.2
and are                                            √      √
                                                 2 2 sin λn
                                     cn =                 √           .                      (23)
                                            λn (1 + cos2 λn )1/2
Putting everything together, we finally obtain the solution
                                                    √
                                 ∞
                                                 sin λn                    
                          y=4                                 √         sin λn x.            (24)
                                     λ
                                 n=1 n n
                                        (λ  −   2)(1 +  cos 2   λ n )
   Although Eqs. (17) and (24) are quite different in appearance, they are actually two different
expressions for the same function. This follows from the uniqueness part of Theorem 11.3.1
or 11.3.2, since λ = 2 is not an eigenvalue of the homogeneous problem (19). Alternatively,
you can show the equivalence of Eqs. (17) and (24) by expanding the right side of Eq. (17)
in terms of the eigenfunctions φn (x). For this problem it is fairly obvious that Eq. (17) is a
more convenient expression for the solution than Eq. (24). However, we emphasize again that
in other problems we may not be able to obtain the solution except by series (or numerical
approximation) methods.
Nonhomogeneous Heat Conduction Problems. To show how eigenfunction expansions can
be used to solve nonhomogeneous problems for partial differential equations, let us
consider the generalized heat conduction equation
                                   r(x)ut = [p(x)ux ]x − q(x)u + F(x, t)                           (25)
with the boundary conditions
                        ux (0, t) − h1 u(0, t) = 0,          ux (1, t) + h2 u(1, t) = 0            (26)
and the initial condition
                                                u(x, 0) = f (x).                                   (27)
This problem was previously discussed in Appendix A of Chapter 10 and in Section
11.1. In the latter section we let u(x, t) = X (x)T(t) in the homogeneous equation
obtained by setting F(x, t) = 0 and showed that X (x) must be a solution of the
boundary value problem
                                        −[p(x)X  ] + q(x)X = λr(x)X ,                            (28)
                           X  (0) − h1 X (0) = 0,          X  (1) + h2 X (1) = 0.                (29)
If we assume that p, q, and r satisfy the proper continuity requirements and that
p(x) and r(x) are always positive, the problem (28), (29) is a Sturm–Liouville
problem as discussed in Section 11.2. Thus we obtain a sequence of eigenvalues
λ1 < λ2 < · · · < λn < · · · and the corresponding normalized eigenfunctions
φ1 (x), φ2 (x), . . . , φn (x), . . . .
   We will solve the given nonhomogeneous boundary value problem (25) to (27) by
assuming that u(x, t) can be expressed as a series of eigenfunctions
                                                       ∞
                                           u(x, t) =       bn (t)φn (x)                            (30)
                                                       n=1
and then showing how to determine the coefficients bn (t). The procedure is basi-
cally the same as that used in the nonhomogeneous Sturm–Liouville problem (1),
(2) that we considered earlier, although it is more complicated in certain respects.
For instance, the coefficients bn must now depend on t, because otherwise u would
be a function of x only. Note that the boundary conditions (26) are automatically
satisfied by an expression of the form (30) because each φn (x) satisfies the boundary
conditions (29).
   Next we substitute from Eq. (30) for u in Eq. (25). From the first two terms on the
right side of Eq. (25), we formally obtain
                                                       ∞
                                                                                  ∞
                                           ∂                                    
                                                                  
           [p(x)ux ]x − q(x)u =                p(x)       bn (t)φn (x) − q(x)         bn (t)φn (x)
                                          ∂x
                                                      n=1                         n=1
                                          ∞         %                           &
                                        =     bn (t) p(x)φn (x) − q(x)φn (x) .                    (31)
                                          n=1
                   
Since p(x)φn (x) − q(x)φn (x) = −λn r(x)φn (x), we obtain finally
                                                              ∞
                                   
                           p(x)ux x − q(x)u = −r(x)               bn (t)λn φn (x).                   (32)
                                                              n=1
Now consider the term on the left side of Eq. (25). We have
                                            ∞                         ∞
                                        ∂                           
                   r(x)ut = r(x)               bn (t)φn (x) = r(x)        bn (t)φn (x).             (33)
                                       ∂t
                                           n=1                       n=1
  We must also express the nonhomogeneous term in Eq. (25) as a series of eigen-
functions. Once again, it is convenient to look at the ratio F(x, t)/r(x) and to write
                                                      ∞
                                        F(x, t) 
                                                =        γn (t)φn (x),                               (34)
                                          r(x)      n=1
where the coefficients are given by
                1                                  1
                          F(x, t)
      γn (t) =      r(x)           φn (x) dx =         F(x, t)φn (x) dx,           n = 1, 2, . . . . (35)
                 0          r(x)                    0
Since F(x, t) is given, we can consider the functions γn (t) to be known.
   Gathering all these results together, we substitute from Eqs. (32), (33), and (34) in
Eq. (25) and find that
                 ∞                             ∞                             ∞
            r(x)     bn (t)φn (x) = −r(x)           bn (t)λn φn (x) + r(x)         γn (t)φn (x).    (36)
                 n=1                            n=1                            n=1
To simplify Eq. (36), we cancel the common nonzero factor r(x) from all terms and
write everything in one summation:
                             ∞
                                                                
                                    bn (t) + λn bn (t) − γn (t) φn (x) = 0.                         (37)
                             n=1
Once again, if Eq. (37) is to hold for all x in 0 < x < 1, it is necessary for the quantity
in square brackets to be zero for each n (again see Problem 14). Hence bn (t) is a
solution of the first order linear ordinary differential equation
                           bn (t) + λn bn (t) = γn (t),         n = 1, 2, . . . ,                   (38)
where γn (t) is given by Eq. (35). To determine bn (t) completely, we must have an
initial condition
                                    bn (0) = Bn ,         n = 1, 2, . . .                            (39)
        for Eq. (38). This we obtain from the initial condition (27). Setting t = 0 in Eq. (30)
        and using Eq. (27), we have
                                          ∞                    ∞
                              u(x, 0) =       bn (0)φn (x) =         Bn φn (x) = f (x).         (40)
                                          n=1                   n=1
        Thus the initial values Bn are the coefficients in the eigenfunction expansion for f (x).
        Therefore,
                                       1
                               Bn =        r(x)f (x)φn (x) dx,         n = 1, 2, . . . .        (41)
                                        0
        Note that everything on the right side of Eq. (41) is known, so we can consider Bn as
        known.
           The initial value problem (38), (39) is solved by the methods of Section 2.1. The
        integrating factor is μ(t) = exp(λn t), and it follows that
                                                t
                        bn (t) = Bn e−λn t +       e−λn (t−s) γn (s) ds,      n = 1, 2, . . . . (42)
                                                0
        The details of this calculation are left to you. Note that the first term on the right side
        of Eq. (42) depends on the function f through the coefficients Bn , while the second
        depends on the nonhomogeneous term F through the coefficients γn (s).
           Thus an explicit solution of the boundary value problem (25) to (27) is given by
        Eq. (30)
                                                       ∞
                                            u(x, t) =       bn (t)φn (x),
                                                       n=1
        where the coefficients bn (t) are determined from Eq. (42). The quantities Bn and
        γn (s) in Eq. (42) are found in turn from Eqs. (41) and (35), respectively.
           Summarizing, to use this method to solve a boundary value problem such as that
        given by Eqs. (25) to (27), we must
        1.   Find the eigenvalues λn and the normalized eigenfunctions φn of the homogeneous
             problem (28), (29).
        2. Calculate the coefficients Bn and γn (t) from Eqs. (41) and (35), respectively.
        3. Evaluate the integral in Eq. (42) to determine bn (t).
        4. Sum the infinite series (30).
           Since any or all of these steps may be difficult, the entire process can be quite
        formidable. One redeeming feature is that often the series (30) converges rapidly, in
        which case only a very few terms may be needed to obtain an adequate approximation
        to the solution.
        Find the solution of the heat conduction problem
EXAMPLE
                                                  ut = uxx + xe−t ,                             (43)
   2
                                      u(0, t) = 0,     ux (1, t) + u(1, t) = 0,                 (44)
                                                    u(x, 0) = 0.                                (45)
   Again we use the normalized eigenfunctions φn of the problem (19) and assume that u is
given by Eq. (30)
                                                         ∞
                                           u(x, t) =         bn (t)φn (x).
                                                         n=1
The coefficients bn are determined from the differential equation
                                               bn + λn bn = γn (t),                                          (46)
where λn is the nth eigenvalue of problem (19) and γn (t) is the nth expansion coefficient of the
nonhomogeneous term xe−t in terms of the eigenfunctions φn . Thus we have
                                     1                           1
                         γn (t) =       xe−t φn (x) dx = e−t          xφn (x) dx = cn e−t ,                   (47)
                                     0                             0
                1
where cn =         xφn (x) dx is given by Eq. (23). The initial condition for Eq. (46) is
                0
                                                      bn (0) = 0                                              (48)
since the initial temperature distribution (45) is zero everywhere. The solution of the initial
value problem (46), (48) is
                                            t
                                                                             e(λn −1)t − 1
                           bn (t) = e−λn t      eλn s cn e−s ds = cn e−λn t
                                             0                                  λn − 1
                                        cn
                                  =           (e−t − e−λn t ).                                                (49)
                                      λn − 1
Thus the solution of the heat conduction problem (43) to (45) is given by
                                                      √                           √
                                          ∞
                                               (sin λn ) (e−t − e−λn t ) sin λn x
                            u(x, t) = 4                                       √          .                    (50)
                                          n=1
                                                   λn (λn − 1)(1 + cos2 λn )
   The solution given by Eq. (50) is exact but complicated. To judge whether a satisfactory
approximation to the solution can be obtained by using only a few terms in this series, we must
estimate its speed of convergence. First we split the right side of Eq. (50) into two parts:
                                      √          √                                    √         √
                        ∞
                                  sin λn sin λn x                    ∞
                                                                           e−λn t sin λn sin λn x
        u(x, t) = 4e−t                                  √      −  4                               √ .         (51)
                             λ (λ − 1)(1 + cos2 λn )
                        n=1 n n
                                                                        λ (λ − 1)(1 + cos2 λn )
                                                                     n=1 n n
Recall from Example 1 in Section 11.1 that the eigenvalues λn are very nearly proportional to
n2 . In the first series on the right side of Eq. (51), the trigonometric factors are all bounded
                                                                             ∞            ∞
as n → ∞; thus this series converges similarly to the series                      λ−2
                                                                                    n or       n−4 . Hence at most
                                                                             n=1           n=1
two or three terms are required for us to obtain an excellent approximation to this part of
the solution. The second series contains the additional factor e−λn t , so its convergence is even
more rapid for t > 0; all terms after the first are almost surely negligible.
Further Discussion. Eigenfunction expansions can be used to solve a much greater
variety of problems than the preceding discussion and examples may suggest. For
example, time-independent nonhomogeneous boundary conditions can be handled
much as in Section 10.6. To reduce the problem to one with homogeneous boundary
conditions, subtract from u a function v that is chosen to satisfy the given bound-
ary conditions. Then the difference w = u − v satisfies a problem with homogeneous
         boundary conditions, but with a modified forcing term and initial condition. This
         problem can be solved by the procedure described in this section.
            One potential difficulty in using eigenfunction expansions is that the normalized
         eigenfunctions of the corresponding homogeneous problem must be found. For a
         differential equation with variable coefficients this may be difficult, if not impossible.
         In such a case it is sometimes possible to use other functions, such as eigenfunctions
         of a simpler problem, that satisfy the same boundary conditions. For instance, if the
         boundary conditions are
                                          u(0, t) = 0,        u(1, t) = 0,                        (52)
         then it may be convenient to replace the functions φn (x) in Eq. (30) by sin nπx. These
         functions at least satisfy the correct boundary conditions, although in general they
         are not solutions of the corresponding homogeneous differential equation. Next we
         expand the nonhomogeneous term F(x, t) in a series of the form (34), again with
         φn (x) replaced by sin nπx, and then substitute for both u and F in Eq. (25). Upon
         collecting the coefficients of sin nπx for each n, we have an infinite set of linear first
         order differential equations from which to determine b1 (t), b2 (t), . . . . The essential
         difference between this case and the one considered earlier is that now the equations
         for the functions bn (t) are coupled. Thus they cannot be solved one by one, as before,
         but must be dealt with simultaneously. In practice, the infinite system is replaced by
         an approximating finite system, from which approximations to a finite number of
         coefficients are calculated.
            Boundary value problems for equations of higher than second order can also often
         be solved by eigenfunction expansions. In some cases the procedure parallels almost
         exactly that for second order problems. However, a variety of complications can also
         arise.
            Finally, we emphasize that the discussion in this section has been purely formal.
         Separate and sometimes elaborate arguments must be used to establish convergence
         of eigenfunction expansions or to justify some of the steps used, such as term-by-term
         differentiation of eigenfunction series.
           There are also other, altogether different methods for solving nonhomogeneous
         boundary value problems. One of these leads to a solution expressed as a definite
         integral rather than as an infinite series. This approach involves certain functions
         known as Green’s functions and, for ordinary differential equations, is the subject of
         Problems 28 through 36.
PROBLEMS In each of Problems 1 through 5, solve the given problem by means of an eigenfunction
         expansion.
          1. y + 2y = −x,     y(0) = 0,    y(1) = 0
          2. y + 2y = −x,     y(0) = 0,    y (1) = 0;   see Section 11.2, Problem 7.
                                             
          3. y + 2y = −x,       y (0) = 0,    y (1) = 0;    see Section 11.2, Problem 3.
          4. y + 2y = −x,     y (0) = 0,   y (1) + y(1) = 0;    see Section 11.2, Problem 11.
              
          5. y + 2y = −1 + |1 − 2x|,        y(0) = 0,    y(1) = 0
In each of Problems 6 through 9, determine a formal eigenfunction series expansion for the
solution of the given problem. Assume that f satisfies the conditions of Theorem 11.3.1. State
the values of μ for which the solution exists.
 6. y + μy = −f (x),                 y(0) = 0,      y (1) = 0
                                      
 7. y + μy = −f (x),                   y (0) = 0,       y(1) = 0
 8. y + μy = −f (x),                 y (0) = 0,      y (1) = 0
                                      
 9. y + μy = −f (x),                   y (0) = 0,       y (1) + y(1) = 0
In each of Problems 10 through 13, determine whether there is any value of the constant a for
which the problem has a solution. Find the solution for each such value.
10. y + π2 y = a + x,                y(0) = 0,       y(1) = 0
      
11. y + 4π y = a + x,
             2
                                        y(0) = 0,        y(1) = 0
12. y + π2 y = a,             y (0) = 0,      y (1) = 0
13. y + π2 y = a − cos πx,                  y(0) = 0,       y(1) = 0
14. Let φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φn , . . . be the normalized eigenfunctions of the differential equation (3) sub-
                                                               ∞
    ject to the boundary conditions (2). If                        cn φn (x) converges to f (x), where f (x) = 0 for
                                                               n=1
    each x in 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, show that cn = 0 for each n.
    Hint: Multiply by r(x)φm (x), integrate, and use the orthogonality property of the
    eigenfunctions.
15. Let L be a second order linear differential operator. Show that the solution y = φ(x) of
    the problem
                                                             L[y] = f (x),
                                                      
                                     α1 y(0) + α2 y (0) = a,             β1 y(1) + β2 y (1) = b
    can be written as y = u + v, where u = φ1 (x) and v = φ2 (x) are solutions of the problems
                                                               L[u] = 0,
                                     α1 u(0) + α2 u (0) = a,            β1 u(1) + β2 u (1) = b
    and
                                                             L[v] = f (x),
                                     α1 v(0) + α2 v (0) = 0,           β1 v(1) + β2 v (1) = 0,
    respectively.
16. Show that the problem
                                          y + π2 y = π2 x,          y(0) = 1,    y(1) = 0
    has the solution
                                                  y = c1 sin πx + cos πx + x.
    Also show that this solution cannot be obtained by splitting the problem as suggested in
    Problem 15, since neither of the two subsidiary problems can be solved in this case.
17. Consider the problem
                                   y + p(x)y + q(x)y = 0,              y(0) = a,      y(1) = b.
    Let y = u + v, where v is any twice-differentiable function satisfying the boundary con-
    ditions (but not necessarily the differential equation). Show that u is a solution of the
    problem
                        u + p(x)u + q(x)u = g(x),              u(0) = 0, u(1) = 0,
    where g(x) = −[v + p(x)v + q(x)v] and is known once v is chosen. Thus nonhomo-
    geneities can be transferred from the boundary conditions to the differential equation.
    Find a function v for this problem.
18. Using the method of Problem 17, transform the problem
                         y + 2y = 2 − 4x,          y(0) = 1,       y(1) + y (1) = −2
    into a new problem in which the boundary conditions are homogeneous. Solve the latter
    problem by reference to Example 1 of the text.
In each of Problems 19 through 22, use eigenfunction expansions to find the solution of the
given boundary value problem.
19. ut = uxx − x,       u(0, t) = 0,     ux (1, t) = 0,     u(x, 0) = sin(πx/2);
    see Problem 2.
20. ut = uxx + e−t ,      ux (0, t) = 0, ux (1, t) + u(1, t) = 0,         u(x, 0) = 1 − x;
    see Section 11.2, Problems 10 and 12.
21. ut = uxx + 1 − |1 − 2x|,         u(0, t) = 0,     u(1, t) = 0,      u(x, 0) = 0;
    see Problem 5.
22. ut = uxx + e−t (1 − x),        u(0, t) = 0,     ux (1, t) = 0,     u(x, 0) = 0;
    see Section 11.2, Problems 6 and 7.
23. Consider the boundary value problem
                                    r(x)ut = [p(x)ux ]x − q(x)u + F(x),
                           u(0, t) = T1 ,        u(1, t) = T2 ,        u(x, 0) = f (x).
    (a) Let v(x) be a solution of the problem
                       [p(x)v ] − q(x)v = −F(x),              v(0) = T1 ,    v(1) = T2 .
    If w(x, t) = u(x, t) − v(x), find the boundary value problem satisfied by w. Note that this
    problem can be solved by the method of this section.
    (b) Generalize the procedure of part (a) to the case where u satisfies the boundary
    conditions
                        ux (0, t) − h1 u(0, t) = T1 ,        ux (1, t) + h2 u(1, t) = T2 .
In each of Problems 24 and 25, use the method indicated in Problem 23 to solve the given
boundary value problem.
24. ut = uxx − 2,                                      25. ut = uxx − π2 cos πx,
    u(0, t) = 1, u(1, t) = 0,                                ux (0, t) = 0, u(1, t) = 1,
    u(x, 0) = x2 − 2x + 2                                    u(x, 0) = cos(3πx/2) − cos πx
26. The method of eigenfunction expansions is often useful for nonhomogeneous problems
    related to the wave equation or its generalizations. Consider the problem
                                   r(x)utt = [p(x)ux ]x − q(x)u + F(x, t),                   (i)
                          ux (0, t) − h1 u(0, t) = 0,        ux (1, t) + h2 u(1, t) = 0,    (ii)
                                    u(x, 0) = f (x),         ut (x, 0) = g(x).             (iii)
     This problem can arise in connection with generalizations of the telegraph equation (Prob-
     lem 16 in Section 11.1) or the longitudinal vibrations of an elastic bar (Problem 25 in
     Section 11.1).
     (a) Let u(x, t) = X (x)T(t) in the homogeneous equation corresponding to Eq. (i), and
     show that X (x) satisfies Eqs. (28) and (29) of the text. Let λn and φn (x) denote the
     eigenvalues and normalized eigenfunctions of this problem.
                                           ∞
     (b) Assume that u(x, t) =                  bn (t)φn (x), and show that bn (t) must satisfy the initial value
                                           n=1
     problem
                           bn (t) + λn bn (t) = γn (t),          bn (0) = αn ,    bn (0) = βn ,
     where αn , βn , and γn (t) are the expansion coefficients for f (x), g(x), and F(x, t)/r(x) in
     terms of the eigenfunctions φ1 (x), . . . , φn (x), . . . .
27. In this problem we explore a little further the analogy between Sturm–Liouville bound-
     ary value problems and Hermitian matrices. Let A be an n × n Hermitian matrix with
     eigenvalues λ1 , . . . , λn and corresponding orthogonal eigenvectors ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (n) .
         Consider the nonhomogeneous system of equations
                                                          Ax − μx = b,                                         (i)
     where μ is a given real number and b is a given vector. We will point out a way of solving
     Eq. (i) that is analogous to the method presented in the text for solving Eqs. (1) and (2).
                               n
     (a) Show that b =             bi ξ (i) , where bi = (b, ξ (i) ).
                              i=1
                                  n
     (b) Assume that x =               ai ξ (i) and show that for Eq. (i) to be satisfied, it is necessary that
                                  i=1
     ai = bi /(λi − μ). Thus
                                                            n
                                                                (b, ξ (i) )
                                                      x=                    ξ (i) ,                           (ii)
                                                            i=1
                                                                λi − μ
     provided that μ is not one of the eigenvalues of A, μ  = λi for i = 1, . . . , n. Compare this
     result with Eq. (13).
Green’s7 Functions.         Consider the nonhomogeneous system of algebraic equations
                                                       Ax − μx = b,                                            (i)
where A is an n × n Hermitian matrix, μ is a given real number, and b is a given vector. Instead
of using an eigenvector expansion as in Problem 27, we can solve Eq. (i) by computing the
inverse matrix (A −μI)−1 , which exists if μ is not an eigenvalue of A. Then
                                                     x = (A − μI)−1 b.                                        (ii)
7 Green’s functions are named after George Green (1793–1841) of England. He was almost entirely self-
taught in mathematics and made significant contributions to electricity and magnetism, fluid mechanics,
and partial differential equations. His most important work was an essay on electricity and magnetism
that was published privately in 1828. In this paper Green was the first to recognize the importance of
potential functions. He introduced the functions now known as Green’s functions as a means of solving
boundary value problems and developed the integral transformation theorems, of which Green’s theorem
in the plane is a particular case. However, these results did not become widely known until Green’s essay
was republished in the 1850s through the efforts of William Thomson (Lord Kelvin).
Problems 28 through 36 indicate a way of solving nonhomogeneous boundary value problems
that is analogous to using the inverse matrix for a system of linear algebraic equations. The
Green’s function plays a part similar to the inverse of the matrix of coefficients. This method
leads to solutions expressed as definite integrals rather than as infinite series. Except in Problem
35, we will assume that μ = 0 for simplicity.
28. (a) Show by the method of variation of parameters that the general solution of the
    differential equation
                                              −y = f (x)
     can be written in the form
                                                          x
                              y = φ(x) = c1 + c2 x −          (x − s)f (s) ds,
                                                           0
    where c1 and c2 are arbitrary constants.
    (b) Let y = φ(x) also be required to satisfy the boundary conditions y(0) = 0,
     y(1) = 0. Show that in this case
                                                       1
                                  c1 = 0,      c2 =       (1 − s)f (s) ds.
                                                       0
    (c) Show that, under the conditions of parts (a) and (b), φ(x) can be written in the form
                                    x                        1
                           φ(x) =      s(1 − x)f (s) ds +        x(1 − s)f (s) ds.
                                     0                         x
    (d) Defining
                                            
                                              s(1 − x),       0 ≤ s ≤ x,
                                 G(x, s) =
                                              x(1 − s),       x ≤ s ≤ 1,
     show that the solution can be written as
                                                1
                                       φ(x) =       G(x, s)f (s) ds.
                                                 0
    The function G(x, s) appearing under the integral sign is a Green’s function. The usefulness
     of a Green’s function solution rests on the fact that the Green’s function is indepen-
     dent of the nonhomogeneous term in the differential equation. Thus, once the Green’s
     function is determined, the solution of the boundary value problem for any nonhomoge-
     neous term f (x) is obtained by a single integration. Note further that no determination
     of arbitrary constants is required, since φ(x) as given by the Green’s function integral
     formula automatically satisfies the boundary conditions.
29. By a procedure similar to that in Problem 28, show that the solution of the boundary value
     problem
                             −(y + y) = f (x),       y(0) = 0, y(1) = 0
     is
                                                    1
                                     y = φ(x) =        G(x, s)f (s) ds,
                                                    0
     where                              ⎧ sin s sin(1 − x)
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎪                      ,  0 ≤ s ≤ x,
                                        ⎨        sin 1
                             G(x, s) =
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎩ sin x sin(1 − s) ,
                                        ⎪
                                                                  x ≤ s ≤ 1.
                                                 sin 1
30. It is possible to show that the Sturm–Liouville problem
                                      L[y] = −[p(x)y ] + q(x)y = f (x),                          (i)
                             α1 y(0) + α2 y (0) = 0,          β1 y(1) + β2 y (1) = 0            (ii)
     has a Green’s function solution
                                                         1
                                         y = φ(x) =          G(x, s)f (s) ds,                    (iii)
                                                         0
     provided that λ = 0 is not an eigenvalue of L[y] = λy subject to the boundary conditions
     (ii). Further, G(x, s) is given by
                                     
                                       −y1 (s)y2 (x)/p(x)W(y1 , y2 )(x), 0 ≤ s ≤ x,
                       G(x, s) =                                                                 (iv)
                                      −y1 (x)y2 (s)/p(x)W(y1 , y2 )(x), x ≤ s ≤ 1,
     where y1 is a solution of L[y] = 0 satisfying the boundary condition at x = 0, y2 is a solution
     of L[y] = 0 satisfying the boundary condition at x = 1, and W(y1 , y2 ) is the Wronskian of
     y1 and y2 .
     (a) Verify that the Green’s function obtained in Problem 28 is given by formula (iv).
     (b) Verify that the Green’s function obtained in Problem 29 is given by formula (iv).
     (c) Show that p(x)W(y1 , y2 )(x) is a constant by showing that its derivative is zero.
     (d) Using Eq. (iv) and the result of part (c), show that G(x, s) = G(s, x).
     (e) Verify that y = φ(x) from Eq. (iii) with G(x, s) given by Eq. (iv) satisfies the differential
     equation (i) and the boundary conditions (ii).
In each of Problems 31 through 34, solve the given boundary value problem by determining
the appropriate Green’s function and expressing the solution as a definite integral. Use Eqs. (i)
to (iv) of Problem 30.
31. −y = f (x),      y (0) = 0,     y(1) = 0
         
32. −y = f (x),        y(0) = 0,       y(1) + y (1) = 0
33. −(y + y) = f (x),        y (0) = 0,      y(1) = 0
34. −y = f (x),      y(0) = 0,       y (1) = 0
35. Consider the boundary value problem
                               L[y] = −[p(x)y ] + q(x)y = μr(x)y + f (x),                        (i)
                                                                             
                             α1 y(0) + α2 y (0) = 0,           β1 y(1) + β2 y (1) = 0.            (ii)
     According to the text, the solution y = φ(x) is given by Eq. (13), where cn is defined by
     Eq. (9), provided that μ is not an eigenvalue of the corresponding homogeneous problem.
     In this case it can also be shown that the solution is given by a Green’s function integral
     of the form                                        1
                                       y = φ(x) =          G(x, s, μ)f (s) ds.                   (iii)
                                                       0
     Note that in this problem the Green’s function also depends on the parameter μ.
     (a) Show that if these two expressions for φ(x) are to be equivalent, then
                                                           ∞
                                                               φi (x)φi (s)
                                           G(x, s, μ) =                     ,                    (iv)
                                                           i=1
                                                                 λi − μ
                   where λi and φi are the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions, respectively, of Eqs. (3), (2) of the
                   text. Again we see from Eq. (iv) that μ cannot be equal to any eigenvalue λi .
                   (b) Derive Eq. (iv) directly by assuming that G(x, s, μ) has the eigenfunction expansion
                                                                 ∞
                                                   G(x, s, μ) =      ai (x, μ)φi (s).                         (v)
                                                                 i=1
                   Determine ai (x, μ) by multiplying Eq. (v) by r(s)φj (s) and integrating with respect to s
                   from s = 0 to s = 1.
                   Hint: Show first that λi and φi satisfy the equation
                                                               1
                                            φi (x) = (λi − μ)     G(x, s, μ)r(s)φi (s) ds.                   (vi)
                                                               0
               36. Consider the boundary value problem
                                         −d2 y/ds2 = δ(s − x),        y(0) = 0,       y(1) = 0,
                   where s is the independent variable, s = x is a definite point in the interval 0 < s < 1, and
                   δ is the Dirac delta function (see Section 6.5). Show that the solution of this problem is
                   the Green’s function G(x, s) obtained in Problem 28.
                       In solving the given problem, note that δ(s − x) = 0 in the intervals 0 ≤ s < x and
                   x < s ≤ 1. Note further that −dy/ds experiences a jump of magnitude 1 as s passes through
                   the value x.
                       This problem illustrates a general property, namely, that the Green’s function G(x, s)
                   can be identified as the response at the point s to a unit impulse at the point x. A more gen-
                   eral nonhomogeneous term f on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 can be regarded as a continuous distribution of
                   impulses with magnitude f (x) at the point x. The solution of a nonhomogeneous boundary
                   value problem in terms of a Green’s function integral can then be interpreted as the result
                   of superposing the responses to the set of impulses represented by the nonhomogeneous
                   term f (x).
11.4 Singular Sturm–Liouville Problems
               In the preceding sections of this chapter, we considered Sturm–Liouville boundary
               value problems: the differential equation
                                  L[y] = −[p(x)y ] + q(x)y = λr(x)y,                0 < x < 1,             (1)
               together with boundary conditions of the form
                                                    α1 y(0) + α2 y (0) = 0,                                 (2)
                                                    β1 y(1) + β2 y (1) = 0.                                 (3)
               Until now, we have always assumed that the problem is regular. That is, we have
               assumed that p is differentiable, that p , q, and r are continuous, and that p(x) > 0
               and r(x) > 0 at all points in the closed interval. However, there are also equations of
               physical interest in which some of these conditions are not satisfied.
   For example, suppose that we wish to study Bessel’s equation of order ν on the
interval 0 < x < 1. This equation is sometimes written in the form8
                                                     ν2
                                       −(xy ) +       y = λxy                                         (4)
                                                     x
so that p(x) = x, q(x) = ν2 /x, and r(x) = x. Thus p(0) = 0, r(0) = 0, and q(x) is
unbounded and hence discontinuous as x → 0. However, the conditions imposed
on regular Sturm–Liouville problems are met elsewhere in the interval.
   Similarly, for Legendre’s equation we have
                             −[(1 − x2 )y ] = λy,          −1 < x < 1,                                (5)
where λ = α(α + 1), p(x) = 1 − x2 , q(x) = 0, and r(x) = 1. Here the required condi-
tions on p, q, and r are satisfied in the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 except at x = 1, where p is
zero.
   We use the term “singular Sturm–Liouville problem” to refer to a certain class of
boundary value problems for the differential equation (1) in which the functions p, q,
and r satisfy the conditions stated earlier on the open interval 0 < x < 1, but at least
one of these functions fails to satisfy them at one or both of the boundary points.
We also prescribe suitable separated boundary conditions of a kind to be described
in more detail later in this section. Singular problems also occur if the interval is
unbounded, for example, 0 ≤ x < ∞. We do not consider this latter kind of singular
problem in this book.
   As an example of a singular problem on a finite interval, consider the equation
                                        xy + y + λxy = 0,                                            (6)
or
                                           −(xy ) = λxy,                                              (7)
on the interval 0 < x < 1, and suppose that λ > 0. This equation arises in the study of
free vibrations of a circular elastic membrane and is discussed further            √        in Section 11.5.
If we introduce the new independent variable t defined by t = λ x, then
                                dy √ dy                 d2 y        d2 y
                                    = λ ,                    =   λ        .
                                dx            dt        dx2          dt 2
Hence Eq. (6) becomes
                                t      d2 y √ dy               t
                               √ λ 2 + λ                 + λ √ y = 0,
                                  λ    dt            dt          λ
                                            √
or, if we cancel the common factor λ in each term,
                                         d2 y dy
                                       t       +      + ty = 0.                                         (8)
                                         dt 2     dt
Equation (8) is Bessel’s equation of order zero (see Section 5.7). The general solution
of Eq. (8) for t > 0 is
                                      y = c1 J0 (t) + c2 Y0 (t);
                      √
8The substitution t =  λ x reduces Eq. (4) to the standard form t 2 y + ty + (t 2 − ν2 )y = 0.
hence the general solution of Eq. (7) for x > 0 is
                                                  √                 √
                                     y = c1 J0 ( λ x) + c2 Y0 ( λ x),                                      (9)
where J0 and Y0 denote the Bessel functions of the first and second kinds of order
zero. From Eqs. (7) and (13) of Section 5.7, we have
                                                 ∞
                                √                     (−1)m λm x2m
                            J0 ( λ x) = 1 +                           ,      x > 0,                       (10)
                                                        22m (m!)2
                                                m=1
                                   √                         ∞
                                                                                           
        √            2                 λx          √              (−1)m+1 Hm λm x2m
   Y0 ( λ x) =              γ + ln             J0 ( λ x) +                                   ,       x > 0,
                     π                 2                                 22m (m!)2
                                                              m=1
                                                                                                          (11)
where Hm = 1 + (1/2) + · · · + (1/m) and γ = lim (Hm − ln m). The graphs of
                                                                  m→∞
y = J0 (x) and y = Y0 (x) are given in Figure 5.7.2.
   Suppose that we seek a solution of Eq. (7) that also satisfies the boundary con-
ditions
                                                   y(0) = 0,                                              (12)
                                                   y(1) = 0,                                              (13)
which are typical of those we have met in other problems in this chapter. Since
J0 (0) = 1 and Y0 (x) → −∞ as x → 0, the condition y(0) = 0 can be satisfied only by
choosing c1 = c2 = 0 in Eq. (9). Thus the boundary value problem (7), (12), (13) has
only the trivial solution.
   One interpretation of this result is that the boundary condition (12) at x = 0 is
too restrictive for the differential equation (7). This illustrates the general situation,
namely, that at a singular boundary point it is necessary to consider a modified type
of boundary condition. In the present problem, suppose that we require only that
the solution (9) and its derivative remain bounded. In other words, we take as the
boundary condition at x = 0 the requirement
                                         y, y bounded as x → 0.                                          (14)
This condition can be satisfied by choosing c2 = 0 in Eq. (9), so as to eliminate the
unbounded solution Y0 . The second boundary condition, y(1) = 0, then yields
                                                     √
                                                 J0 ( λ) = 0.                                             (15)
It is possible to show9 that Eq. (15) has an infinite set of discrete positive roots,
which yield the eigenvalues 0 < λ1 < λ2 < · · · < λn < · · · of the given problem. The
corresponding eigenfunctions are
                                                            
                                            φn (x) = J0 λn x ,                                            (16)
9The function J
                0 is well tabulated; the roots of Eq. (15) can be found in tables such as those in Abramowitz
and Stegun. You√ can also use a computer algebra system to compute them quickly.√The first three roots
of Eq. (15) are λ = 2.405, 5.520, and 8.654, respectively, to four significant figures; λn ∼     = (n − 1/4)π for
large n.
determined only up to a multiplicative constant. The boundary value problem (7),
(13), (14) is an example of a singular Sturm–Liouville problem. This example illus-
trates that if the boundary conditions are relaxed in an appropriate way, then a
singular Sturm–Liouville problem may have an infinite sequence of eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions, just as a regular Sturm–Liouville problem does.
   Because of their importance in applications, it is worthwhile to investigate singular
boundary value problems a little further. There are two main questions that are of
concern:
1.  Precisely what type of boundary conditions can be allowed in a singular Sturm–Liouville
    problem?
2. To what extent do the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of a singular problem share the
    properties of eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of regular Sturm–Liouville problems? In
    particular, are the eigenvalues real, are the eigenfunctions orthogonal, and can a given
    function be expanded as a series of eigenfunctions?
   Both of these questions can be answered by a study of the identity
                                 1
                                    {L[u]v − uL[v]} dx = 0,                             (17)
                                 0
which played an essential part in the development of the theory of regular Sturm–
Liouville problems. We therefore investigate the conditions under which this relation
holds for singular problems, where the integral in Eq. (17) may now have to be
examined as an improper integral.To be definite,we consider the differential equation
(1) and assume that x = 0 is a singular boundary point but that x = 1 is not. The
boundary condition (3) is imposed at the nonsingular boundary point x = 1, but we
leave unspecified, for the moment, the boundary condition at x = 0. Indeed, our
principal objective is to determine what kinds of boundary conditions are allowable
at a singular boundary point if Eq. (17) is to hold.
   Since the boundary value problem under investigation is singular at x = 0, we
                                                1                       1
choose  > 0 and consider the integral             L[u]v dx, instead of      L[u]v dx, as in
                                                                        0
Section 11.2. Afterwards we let  approach zero. Assuming that u and v have at least
two continuous derivatives on  ≤ x ≤ 1, and integrating twice by parts, we find that
               1
                   "               #                                     1
                     L[u]v − uL[v] dx = −p(x) u (x)v(x) − u(x)v (x)  .               (18)
                                                                            
The boundary term at x = 1 is again eliminated if both u and v satisfy the boundary
condition (3), and thus
                   1
                      "                 #                               
                        L[u]v − uL[v] dx = p() u ()v() − u()v () .               (19)
                   
Taking the limit as  → 0 yields
                 1
                    "                #                                     
                      L[u]v − uL[v] dx = lim p() u ()v() − u()v () .             (20)
                 0                           →0
Hence Eq. (17) holds if and only if, in addition to the assumptions stated previously,
                                                           
                            lim p() u ()v() − u()v () = 0                        (21)
                            →0
for every pair of functions u and v in the class under consideration. Equation (21) is
therefore the criterion that determines what boundary conditions are allowable at
x = 0 if that point is a singular boundary point. A similar condition applies at x = 1
if that boundary point is singular, namely,
                                                                                 
                   lim p(1 − ) u (1 − )v(1 − ) − u(1 − )v (1 − ) = 0.                          (22)
                   →0
    In summary, as in Section 11.2, a singular boundary value problem for Eq. (1) is
said to be self-adjoint if Eq. (17) is valid, possibly as an improper integral, for each
pair of functions u and v with the following properties: they are twice continuously
differentiable on the open interval 0 < x < 1, they satisfy a boundary condition of
the form (2) at each regular boundary point, and they satisfy a boundary condition
sufficient to ensure Eq. (21) if x = 0 is a singular boundary point, or Eq. (22) if
x = 1 is a singular boundary point. If at least one boundary point is singular, then
the differential equation (1), together with two boundary conditions of the type just
described, are said to form a singular Sturm–Liouville problem.
    For example, for Eq. (7) we have p(x) = x. If both u and v satisfy the boundary
condition (14) at x = 0, it is clear that Eq. (21) will hold. Hence the singular bound-
ary value problem, consisting of the differential equation (7), the boundary condition
(14) at x = 0, and any boundary condition of the form (3) at x = 1, is self-adjoint.
    The most striking difference between regular and singular Sturm–Liouville prob-
lems is that in a singular problem the eigenvalues may not be discrete. That is, the
problem may have nontrivial solutions for every value of λ, or for every value of λ in
some interval. In such a case the problem is said to have a continuous spectrum. It
may happen that a singular problem has a mixture of discrete eigenvalues and also
a continuous spectrum. Finally, it is possible that only a discrete set of eigenvalues
exists, just as in the regular case discussed in Section 11.2. For example, this is true
of the problem consisting of Eqs. (7), (13), and (14). In general, it may be difficult to
determine which case actually occurs in a given problem.
    A systematic discussion of singular Sturm–Liouville problems is quite sophisti-
cated10 indeed, requiring a substantial extension of the methods presented in this
book. We restrict ourselves to some examples related to physical applications; in
each of these examples it is known that there is an infinite set of discrete eigenvalues.
    If a singular Sturm–Liouville problem does have only a discrete set of eigenvalues
and eigenfunctions, then Eq. (17) can be used, just as in Section 11.2, to prove that the
eigenvalues of such a problem are real and that the eigenfunctions are orthogonal
with respect to the weight function r. The expansion of a given function in terms of
a series of eigenfunctions then follows as in Section 11.2.
    Such expansions are useful, as in the regular case, for solving nonhomoge-
neous boundary value problems. The procedure is very similar to that described in
Section 11.3. Some examples for ordinary differential equations are indicated
in Problems 1 to 4, and some problems for partial differential equations appear in
Section 11.5.
10 See, for example, Chapter 5 of the book by Yosida listed in the references at the end of this chapter.
                                                                 √
            For instance, the eigenfunctions φn (x) = J0 ( λn x) of the singular Sturm–Liouville
         problem
                                         −(xy ) = λxy,          0 < x < 1,
                                    y, y bounded as x → 0,             y(1) = 0
         satisfy the orthogonality relation
                                      1
                                           xφm (x)φn (x) dx = 0,         m = n              (23)
                                       0
         with respect to the weight function r(x) = x. Then, if f is a given function, we assume
         that
                                                       ∞
                                                                  
                                             f (x) =       cn J0 ( λn x).                    (24)
                                                       n=1
                                          √
         Multiplying Eq. (24) by xJ0 ( λm x) and integrating term by term from x = 0 to x = 1,
         we obtain
                        1                           ∞       1                 
                           xf (x)J0 ( λm x) dx =           cn     xJ0 ( λm x) J0 ( λn x) dx. (25)
                        0                             n=1      0
         Because of the orthogonality condition (23), the right side of Eq. (25) collapses to a
         single term; hence
                                                  1             
                                                      xf (x)J0 ( λm x) dx
                                          cm = 0 1                         ,                (26)
                                                              
                                                        xJ0 ( λm x) dx
                                                            2
                                                     0
         which determines the coefficients in the series (24).
           The convergence of the series (24) is established by an extension of Theorem 11.2.4
         to cover this case. This theorem can also be shown to hold for other sets of Bessel
         functions, which are solutions of appropriate boundary value problems; for Legendre
         polynomials; and for solutions of a number of other singular Sturm–Liouville pro-
         blems of considerable interest.
            It must be emphasized that the singular problems mentioned here are not nec-
         essarily typical. In general, singular boundary value problems are characterized by
         continuous spectra, rather than by discrete sets of eigenvalues. The corresponding
         sets of eigenfunctions are therefore not denumerable, and series expansions of the
         type described in Theorem 11.2.4 do not exist. They are replaced by appropriate
         integral representations.
PROBLEMS  1. Find a formal solution of the nonhomogeneous boundary value problem
                                                  −(xy ) = μxy + f (x),
                                         y, y bounded as x → 0,         y(1) = 0,
   where f is a given continuous function on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and μ is not an eigenvalue of the
   corresponding homogeneous problem.
   Hint: Use a series expansion similar to those in Section 11.3.
2. Consider the boundary value problem
                                               −(xy ) = λxy,
                               y, y bounded as x → 0,                 y (1) = 0.
   (a) Show that λ0 = 0 is an eigenvalue of this problem corresponding to the eigenfunction   √
   φ0 (x) =√1. If λ > 0, show formally that the eigenfunctions are given by φn (x)√= J0 ( λn x),
   where λn is the nth positive root (in increasing order) of the equation J0 ( λ) = 0. It is
   possible to show that there is an infinite sequence of such roots.
   (b) Show that if m, n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , then
                                 1
                                      xφm (x)φn (x) dx = 0,             m  = n.
                                  0
   (c) Find a formal solution to the nonhomogeneous problem
                                         −(xy ) = μxy + f (x),
                               y, y bounded as x → 0,                 y (1) = 0,
   where f is a given continuous function on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and μ is not an eigenvalue of the
   corresponding homogeneous problem.
3. Consider the problem
                                       −(xy ) + (k2 /x)y = λxy,
                                    
                               y, y bounded as x → 0,                  y(1) = 0,
   where k is a positive integer.
                                      √
   (a) Using the substitution t = λ x, show that the given differential equation reduces to
   Bessel’s equation of order k (see Problem 9 of Section 5.7). One solution is Jk (t); a second
   linearly independent solution, denoted by Yk (t), is unbounded as t → 0.
   (b) Show formally that the eigenvalues    √          λ1 , λ2 , . . . of the given problem are the
   squares of √ the positive zeros of Jk ( λ) and that the corresponding eigenfunctions are
   φn (x) = Jk ( λn x). It is possible to show that there is an infinite sequence of such zeros.
   (c) Show that the eigenfunctions φn (x) satisfy the orthogonality relation
                                 1
                                      xφm (x)φn (x) dx = 0,             m  = n.
                                  0
   (d) Determine the coefficients in the formal series expansion
                                                    ∞
                                           f (x) =       an φn (x).
                                                    n=1
   (e) Find a formal solution of the nonhomogeneous problem
                                    −(xy ) + (k2 /x)y = μxy + f (x),
                               y, y bounded as x → 0,                 y(1) = 0,
   where f is a given continuous function on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and μ is not an eigenvalue of the
   corresponding homogeneous problem.
                 4. Consider Legendre’s equation (see Problems 22 through 24 of Section 5.3)
                                                             −[(1 − x2 )y ] = λy
                    subject to the boundary conditions
                                                y(0) = 0,         y, y bounded as x → 1.
                    The eigenvalues for this problem are λ1 = 2, λ2 = 4 · 3, . . . , λn = 2n(2n − 1), . . . and the
                    eigenfunctions are the corresponding odd Legendre polynomials
                        φ1 (x) = P1 (x) = x,   φ2 (x) = P3 (x) = (5x3 − 3x)/2,       ...,    φn (x) = P2n−1 (x), ...
                    (a) Show that
                                                   1
                                                       φm (x)φn (x) dx = 0,        m  = n.
                                                    0
                    (b) Find a formal solution of the nonhomogeneous problem
                                                      −[(1 − x2 )y ] = μy + f (x),
                                                y(0) = 0,         y, y bounded as x → 1,
                    where f is a given continuous function on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and μ is not an eigenvalue of the
                    corresponding homogeneous problem.
                 5. The equation
                                                       (1 − x2 )y − xy + λy = 0                                    (i)
                    is Chebyshev’s equation; see Problem 10 of Section 5.3.
                    (a) Show that Eq. (i) can be written in the form
                                         −[(1 − x2 )1/2 y ] = λ(1 − x2 )−1/2 y,      −1 < x < 1.                   (ii)
                    (b) Consider the boundary conditions
                                       y, y bounded as x → −1,             y, y bounded as x → 1.                (iii)
                    Show that the boundary value problem (ii), (iii) is self-adjoint.
                    (c) It can be shown that the boundary value problem (ii), (iii) has the eigenvalues
                    λ0 = 0, λ1 = 1, λ2 = 4, . . . , λn = n2 , . . . . The corresponding eigenfunctions are the
                    Chebyshev polynomials Tn (x): T0 (x) = 1, T1 (x) = x, T2 (x) = 1 − 2x2 , . . . . Show that
                                                  1
                                                      Tm (x)Tn (x)
                                                                      dx = 0,       m  = n.                       (iv)
                                                   −1 (1 − x )
                                                               2 1/2
                    Note that this is a convergent improper integral.
11.5 Further Remarks on the Method of Separation
     of Variables: A Bessel Series Expansion
                In this chapter we are interested in extending the method of separation of vari-
                ables developed in Chapter 10 to a larger class of problems—to problems involving
                more general differential equations, more general boundary conditions, or different
                geometrical regions. We indicated in Section 11.3 how to deal with a class of more
general differential equations or boundary conditions. Here we concentrate on prob-
lems posed in various geometrical regions, with emphasis on those leading to singular
Sturm–Liouville problems when the variables are separated.
   Because of its relative simplicity, as well as the considerable physical significance of
many problems to which it is applicable, the method of separation of variables merits
its important place in the theory and application of partial differential equations.
However, this method does have certain limitations that should not be forgotten. In
the first place, the problem must be linear so that the principle of superposition can
be invoked to construct additional solutions by forming linear combinations of the
fundamental solutions of an appropriate homogeneous problem.
   As a practical matter, we must also be able to solve the ordinary differential equa-
tions, obtained after separating the variables, in a reasonably convenient manner.
In some problems to which the method of separation of variables can be applied in
principle, it is of very limited practical value due to a lack of information about the
solutions of the ordinary differential equations that appear.
   Furthermore, the geometry of the region involved in the problem is subject to
rather severe restrictions. On the one hand, a coordinate system must be employed
in which the variables can be separated, and the partial differential equation replaced
by a set of ordinary differential equations. For Laplace’s equation there are about a
dozen such coordinate systems; only rectangular, circular cylindrical, and spherical
coordinates are likely to be familiar to most readers of this book. On the other
hand, the boundary of the region of interest must consist of coordinate curves or
surfaces—that is, curves or surfaces on which one variable remains constant. Thus, at
an elementary level, we are limited to regions bounded by straight lines or circular
arcs in two dimensions, or by planes, circular cylinders, circular cones, or spheres in
three dimensions.
   In three-dimensional problems, the separation of variables in Laplace’s operator
uxx + uyy + uzz leads to the equation X  + λX = 0 in rectangular coordinates, to
Bessel’s equation in cylindrical coordinates, and to Legendre’s equation in spherical
coordinates. It is this fact that is largely responsible for the intensive study that has
been made of these equations and the functions defined by them. It is also noteworthy
that two of the three most important situations lead to singular, rather than regular,
Sturm–Liouville problems. Thus singular problems are by no means exceptional and
may be of even greater interest than regular ones. The remainder of this section is
devoted to an example involving an expansion of a given function as a series of Bessel
functions.
The Vibrations of a Circular Elastic Membrane. In Section 10.7 [Eq. (7)] we noted that the
transverse vibrations of a thin elastic membrane are governed by the two-dimensional
wave equation
                                     a2 (uxx + uyy ) = utt .                           (1)
To study the motion of a circular membrane, it is convenient to write Eq. (1) in polar
coordinates:
                                  
                                          1       1
                               a2
                                    urr + ur + 2 uθθ        = utt .                    (2)
                                           r     r
We will assume that the membrane has unit radius, that it is fixed securely around
its circumference, and that initially it occupies a displaced position independent of
the angular variable θ, from which it is released at time t = 0. Because of the circular
symmetry of the initial and boundary conditions, it is natural to assume also that u is
independent of θ; hence u is a function of r and t only. In this event the differential
equation (2) becomes
                            
                                      1
                        a urr + ur = utt ,
                          2
                                                           0 < r < 1, t > 0.                    (3)
                                      r
The boundary condition at r = 1 is
                                         u(1, t) = 0,        t ≥ 0,                             (4)
and the initial conditions are
                                   u(r, 0) = f (r),         0 ≤ r ≤ 1,                          (5)
                                  ut (r, 0) = 0,            0 ≤ r ≤ 1,                          (6)
where f (r) describes the initial configuration of the membrane. For consistency we
also require that f (1) = 0. Finally, we state explicitly the requirement that u(r, t) must
be bounded for 0 ≤ r ≤ 1.
    Assuming that u(r, t) = R(r)T(t), and substituting for u(r, t) in Eq. (3), we obtain
                                  R + (1/r)R         1 T 
                                                     = 2        = −λ2 .                         (7)
                                           R            a T
We have anticipated that the separation constant must be negative by writing it as −λ2
with λ > 0.11 Then Eq. (7) yields the following two ordinary differential equations:
                                      r 2 R + rR + λ2 r 2 R = 0,                             (8)
                                                T  + λ2 a2 T = 0.                             (9)
Thus, from Eq. (9),
                                   T(t) = k1 sin λat + k2 cos λat.                             (10)
Introducing the new independent variable ξ = λr into Eq. (8), we obtain
                                         d2 R       dR
                                     ξ2        +ξ       + ξ 2 R = 0,                           (11)
                                          dξ 2       dξ
which is Bessel’s equation of order zero. Thus
                                        R = c1 J0 (ξ) + c2 Y0 (ξ),                             (12)
where J0 and Y0 are Bessel functions of the first and second kinds, respectively, of
order zero (see Section 11.4). In terms of r, we have
                                      R = c1 J0 (λr) + c2 Y0 (λr).                             (13)
11 By denoting the separation constant by −λ2 , rather than simply by −λ, we avoid the appearance of
numerous radical signs in the following discussion.
The boundedness condition on u(r, t) requires that R remain bounded as r → 0. Since
Y0 (λr) → −∞ as r → 0, we must choose c2 = 0. The boundary condition (4) then
requires that
                                             J0 (λ) = 0.                                 (14)
Consequently, the allowable values of the separation constant are obtained from the
roots of the transcendental equation (14). Recall from Section 11.4 that J0 (λ) has
an infinite set of discrete positive zeros, which we denote by λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , . . . , λn , . . . ,
ordered in increasing magnitude. Further, the functions J0 (λn r) are the eigenfunc-
tions of a singular Sturm–Liouville problem and can be used as the basis of a series
expansion for the given function f . The fundamental solutions of this problem,
which satisfy the partial differential equation (3), the boundary condition (4), and
the boundedness condition, are
                      un (r, t) = J0 (λn r) sin λn at,          n = 1, 2, . . . ,        (15)
                      vn (r, t) = J0 (λn r) cos λn at,           n = 1, 2, . . . .       (16)
Next we assume that u(r, t) can be expressed as an infinite linear combination of the
fundamental solutions (15), (16):
                            ∞
                                                             
                u(r, t) =         kn un (r, t) + cn vn (r, t)
                           n=1
                            ∞
                        =       [kn J0 (λn r) sin λn at + cn J0 (λn r) cos λn at].       (17)
                           n=1
The initial conditions require that
                                            ∞
                               u(r, 0) =         cn J0 (λn r) = f (r),                   (18)
                                            n=1
                                            ∞
                              ut (r, 0) =        λn akn J0 (λn r) = 0.                   (19)
                                            n=1
From Eq. (26) of Section 11.4, we obtain
                                       1
                                           rf (r)J0 (λn r) dr
                kn = 0,        cn = 0 1                        ;     n = 1, 2, . . . .  (20)
                                             r[J0 (λn r)] dr
                                                         2
                                         0
Thus the solution of the partial differential equation (3) satisfying the boundary
condition (4) and the initial conditions (5) and (6) is given by
                                           ∞
                               u(r, t) =        cn J0 (λn r) cos λn at                   (21)
                                           n=1
with the coefficients cn defined by Eq. (20).
PROBLEMS 1. Consider Laplace’s equation uxx + uyy = 0 in the parallelogram whose vertices are (0, 0),
            (2, 0), (3, 2), and (1, 2). Suppose that the boundary condition u(x, 2) = f (x) is imposed on
            the side y = 2 for 1 ≤ x ≤ 3, and that on the other three sides u = 0 (see Figure 11.5.1).
            (a) Show that there are no nontrivial solutions of the partial differential equation of the
            form u(x, y) = X (x)Y(y) that also satisfy the homogeneous boundary conditions.
            (b) Let ξ = x − 21 y, η = y. Show that the given parallelogram in the xy-plane transforms
            into the square 0 ≤ ξ ≤ 2, 0 ≤ η ≤ 2 in the ξη-plane. Show that the differential equation
            transforms into
                                                     5
                                                       u − uξη + uηη = 0.
                                                     4 ξξ
            How are the boundary conditions transformed?
            (c) Show that in the ξη-plane, the differential equation possesses no solution of the form
                                                     u(ξ, η) = U(ξ)V(η).
            Thus in the xy-plane, the shape of the boundary precludes a solution by the method of the
            separation of variables, while in the ξη-plane, the region is acceptable but the variables in
            the differential equation can no longer be separated.
            y                                                       η
                     D                             C              D'                        C'
                   (1, 2)                       (3, 2)          (0, 2)                    (2, 2)
            A (0, 0)             B (2, 0)                 x                          B' (2, 0)        ξ
                                                                    A' (0, 0)
                                  (a)                                                 (b)
                                     FIGURE 11.5.1 The region in Problem 1.
         2. Find the displacement u(r, t) in a vibrating circular elastic membrane of radius 1 that
            satisfies the boundary condition
                                                    u(1, t) = 0,       t ≥ 0,
            and the initial conditions
                                      u(r, 0) = 0,      ut (r, 0) = g(r),     0 ≤ r ≤ 1,
            where g(1) = 0.
            Hint: The differential equation to be satisfied is Eq. (3) of this section.
3. Find the displacement u(r, t) in a vibrating circular elastic membrane of radius 1 that
   satisfies the boundary condition
                                           u(1, t) = 0,         t ≥ 0,
   and the initial conditions
                         u(r, 0) = f (r),        ut (r, 0) = g(r),       0 ≤ r ≤ 1,
   where f (1) = g(1) = 0.
4. The wave equation in polar coordinates is
                                  urr + (1/r)ur + (1/r 2 )uθθ = a−2 utt .
   Show that if u(r, θ, t) = R(r)(θ)T(t), then R, , and T satisfy the ordinary differential
   equations
                                   r 2 R + rR + (λ2 r 2 − n2 )R = 0,
                                                          + n2  = 0,
                                                       T  + λ2 a2 T = 0.
5. In the circular cylindrical coordinates r, θ, z defined by
                               x = r cos θ,          y = r sin θ,      z = z,
   Laplace’s equation is
                                 urr + (1/r)ur + (1/r 2 )uθθ + uzz = 0.
   (a) Show that if u(r, θ, z) = R(r)(θ)Z(z),then R,,and Z satisfy the ordinary differential
   equations
                                   r 2 R + rR + (λ2 r 2 − n2 )R = 0,
                                                          + n2  = 0,
                                                          Z  − λ2 Z = 0.
   (b) Show that if u(r, θ, z) is independent of θ, then the first equation in part (a) becomes
                                        r 2 R + rR + λ2 r 2 R = 0,
   the second is omitted altogether, and the third is unchanged.
6. Find the steady state temperature in a semi-infinite rod 0 < z < ∞, 0 ≤ r < 1, if the tem-
   perature is independent of θ and approaches zero as z → ∞. Assume that the temperature
   u(r, z) satisfies the boundary conditions
                                     u(1, z) = 0,           z > 0,
                                     u(r, 0) = f (r),          0 ≤ r ≤ 1.
   Hint: Refer to Problem 5.
  7. The equation
                                               vxx + vyy + k2 v = 0
     is a generalization of Laplace’s equation and is sometimes called the Helmholtz12 equation.
     (a) In polar coordinates the Helmholtz equation is
                                     vrr + (1/r)vr + (1/r 2 )vθθ + k2 v = 0.
     If v(r, θ) = R(r)(θ), show that R and  satisfy the ordinary differential equations
                          r 2 R + rR + (k2 r 2 − λ2 )R = 0,          + λ2  = 0.
     (b) Consider the Helmholtz equation in the disk r < c. Find the solution that remains
     bounded at all points in the disk, that is periodic in θ with period 2π, and that satisfies the
     boundary condition v(c, θ) = f (θ), where f is a given function on 0 ≤ θ < 2π.
     Hint: The equation for R is a Bessel equation. See Problem 3 of Section 11.4.
  8. Consider the flow of heat in a cylinder 0 ≤ r < 1, 0 ≤ θ < 2π, −∞ < z < ∞ of radius 1
     and of infinite length. Let the surface of the cylinder be held at temperature zero, and let
     the initial temperature distribution be a function of the radial variable r only. Then the
     temperature u is a function of r and t only and satisfies the heat conduction equation
                              α2 [urr + (1/r)ur ] = ut ,        0 < r < 1,       t > 0,
     and the following initial and boundary conditions:
                                         u(r, 0) = f (r),       0 ≤ r ≤ 1,
                                         u(1, t) = 0,           t > 0.
     Show that
                                                    ∞
                                                                       2 2
                                         u(r, t) =      cn J0 (λn r)e−α λn t ,
                                                    n=1
     where J0 (λn ) = 0. Find a formula for cn .
  9. In the spherical coordinates ρ, θ, φ (ρ > 0, 0 ≤ θ < 2π, 0 ≤ φ ≤ π) defined by the equations
                        x = ρ cos θ sin φ,         y = ρ sin θ sin φ,          z = ρ cos φ,
     Laplace’s equation is
                           ρ2 uρρ + 2ρuρ + (csc2 φ)uθθ + uφφ + (cot φ)uφ = 0.
     (a) Show that if u(ρ, θ, φ) = P(ρ)(θ)(φ), then P, , and  satisfy ordinary differential
     equations of the form
                                                             ρ2 P + 2ρP − μ2 P = 0,
                                                                         + λ2  = 0,
                         (sin2 φ) + (sin φ cos φ) + (μ2 sin2 φ − λ2 ) = 0.
12The German scientist Hermann von Helmholtz (1821–1894) was trained in medicine and physiology;
early in his career he made important contributions to physiological optics and acoustics, including the
invention of the ophthalmoscope in 1851. Later his interests turned to physics, especially fluid mechan-
ics and electrodynamics. During his lifetime, he held chairs in physiology or physics at several German
universities.
                      The first of these equations is of the Euler type, while the third is related to Legendre’s
                      equation.
                      (b) Show that if u(ρ, θ, φ) is independent of θ, then the first equation in part (a) is
                      unchanged, the second is omitted, and the third becomes
                                            (sin2 φ) + (sin φ cos φ) + (μ2 sin2 φ) = 0.
                      (c) Show that if a new independent variable is defined by s = cos φ, then the equation for
                       in part (b) becomes
                                                    d2        d
                                          (1 − s2 )      − 2s      + μ2  = 0,        −1 ≤ s ≤ 1.
                                                    ds2        ds
                      Note that this is Legendre’s equation.
                10. Find the steady state temperature u(ρ, φ) in a sphere of unit radius if the temperature is
                      independent of θ and satisfies the boundary condition
                                                      u(1, φ) = f (φ),      0 ≤ φ ≤ π.
                      Hint: Refer to Problem 9 and to Problems 22 through 29 of Section 5.3. Use the fact that
                      the only solutions of Legendre’s equation that are finite at both ±1 are the Legendre
                      polynomials.
11.6 Series of Orthogonal Functions: Mean Convergence
                In Section 11.2 we stated that under certain restrictions, a given function f can be
                expanded in a series of eigenfunctions of a Sturm–Liouville boundary value problem,
                the series converging to [f (x+) + f (x−)]/2 at each point in the open interval. Under
                somewhat more restrictive conditions, the series converges to f (x) at each point in
                the closed interval. This type of convergence is referred to as pointwise convergence.
                In this section we describe a different kind of convergence that is especially useful
                for series of orthogonal functions, such as eigenfunctions.
                    Suppose that we are given the set of functions φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φn , that are continuous
                on the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and satisfy the orthonormality condition
                                               1                          
                                                                              0, i  = j,
                                                   r(x)φi (x)φj (x) dx =                                    (1)
                                               0                              1, i = j,
                where r is a nonnegative weight function. Suppose also that we wish to approximate
                a given function f , defined on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, by a linear combination of φ1 , . . . , φn . That
                is, if
                                                                   n
                                                         Sn (x) =      ai φi (x),                           (2)
                                                                   i=1
                we wish to choose the coefficients a1 , . . . , an so that the function Sn will best approx-
                imate f on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. The first problem that we must face in doing this is to state
                precisely what we mean by “best approximate f on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.” There are several
                reasonable meanings that can be attached to this phrase.
1. We can choose n points x1 , . . . , xn in the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and require that Sn (x) have the
    same value as f (x) at each of these points. The coefficients a1 , . . . , an are found by solving
    the set of linear algebraic equations
                                          n
                                               ai φi (xj ) = f (xj ),      j = 1, . . . , n.             (3)
                                          i=1
    This procedure is known as the method of collocation. It has the advantage that it is very
    easy to write down Eqs. (3); we need only to evaluate the functions involved at the points
    x1 , . . . , xn . If these points are well chosen, and if n is fairly large, then presumably Sn (x)
    not only will be equal to f (x) at the chosen points but will be reasonably close to it at
    other points as well. However, collocation has several deficiencies. One is that if one more
    base function φn+1 is added, then one more point xn+1 is required, and all the coefficients
    must be recomputed. Thus it is inconvenient to improve the accuracy of a collocation
    approximation by including additional terms. Further, the coefficients ai depend on the
    location of the points x1 , . . . , xn , and it is not obvious how best to select these points.
2. Alternatively, we can consider the difference |f (x) − Sn (x)| and try to make it as small as
    possible. The trouble here is that |f (x) − Sn (x)| is a function of x as well as of the coefficients
    a1 , . . . , an , and it is not clear how to calculate ai . The choice of ai that makes |f (x) − Sn (x)|
    small at one point may make it large at another. One way to proceed is to consider instead
    the least upper bound13 of |f (x) − Sn (x)| for x in 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and then to choose a1 , . . . , an
    so as to make this quantity as small as possible. That is, if
                                         En (a1 , . . . , an ) = lub |f (x) − Sn (x)|,                   (4)
                                                                  0≤x≤1
    then choose a1 , . . . , an so as to minimize En . This approach is intuitively appealing and is
    often used in theoretical calculations. In practice, however, it is usually very hard, if not
    impossible, to write down an explicit formula for En (a1 , . . . , an ). Further, this procedure
    shares one of the disadvantages of collocation: upon adding an additional term to Sn (x),
    we must recompute all the preceding coefficients. Thus it is not often useful in practical
    problems.
3. Another way to proceed is to consider
                                                               1
                                      In (a1 , . . . , an ) =      r(x)|f (x) − Sn (x)| dx.              (5)
                                                               0
    If r(x) = 1, then In is the area between the graphs of y = f (x) and y = Sn (x) (see
    Figure 11.6.1). We can then determine the coefficients ai so as to minimize In . To avoid
    the complications resulting from calculations with absolute values, it is more convenient
    to consider instead
                                                               1                        2
                                     Rn (a1 , . . . , an ) =      r(x) f (x) − Sn (x) dx                 (6)
                                                               0
    as our measure of the quality of approximation of the linear combination Sn (x) to f (x).
    Although Rn is clearly similar in some ways to In , it lacks the simple geometric interpre-
    tation of the latter. Nevertheless, it is much easier mathematically to deal with Rn than
    with In . The quantity Rn is called the mean square error of the approximation Sn to f . If
    a1 , . . . , an are chosen so as to minimize Rn , then Sn is said to approximate f in the mean
    square sense.
13The least upper bound (lub) is an upper bound that is smaller than any other upper bound. The lub of
a bounded function always exists and is equal to the function’s maximum if it has one.
                                y
                                                   y = Sn(x)
                                               y = f (x)
                                                                       1     x
                           FIGURE 11.6.1 Approximation of f (x) by Sn (x).
   To choose a1 , . . . , an so as to minimize Rn , we must satisfy the necessary conditions
                                   ∂Rn /∂ai = 0,         i = 1, . . . , n.                      (7)
Writing out Eq. (7) and noting that ∂Sn (x; a1 , . . . , an )/∂ai is equal to φi (x), we obtain
                                        1
                              ∂Rn
                           −       =2      r(x)[f (x) − Sn (x)]φi (x) dx = 0.                   (8)
                              ∂ai       0
Substituting for Sn (x) from Eq. (2) and making use of the orthogonality relation (1),
we find that                        1
                             ai =     r(x)f (x)φi (x) dx,       i = 1, . . . , n.               (9)
                                   0
The coefficients defined by Eq. (9) are called the Fourier coefficients of f with respect
to the orthonormal set φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φn and the weight function r. Since the conditions
(7) are only necessary and not sufficient for Rn to be a minimum, a separate argument
is required to show that Rn is actually minimized if the ai are chosen by Eq. (9). This
argument is outlined in Problem 5.
   Note that the coefficients (9) are the same as those in the eigenfunction series whose
convergence, under certain conditions, was stated in Theorem 11.2.4. Thus Sn (x) is
the nth partial sum in this series and constitutes the best mean square approximation
to f (x) that is possible with the functions φ1 , . . . , φn . We will assume hereafter that
the coefficients ai in Sn (x) are given by Eq. (9).
   Equation (9) is noteworthy in two other important respects. In the first place, it
gives a formula for each ai separately,rather than a set of linear algebraic equations for
a1 , . . . , an as in the method of collocation, for example. This is due to the orthogonality
of the base functions φ1 , . . . , φn . Further, the formula for ai is independent of n, the
number of terms in Sn (x). The practical significance of this is as follows. Suppose
that, to obtain a better approximation to f , we desire to use an approximation with
more terms—say, k terms, where k > n. It is then unnecessary to recompute the first
n coefficients in Sk (x). All that is required is to compute, from Eq. (9), the coefficients
an+1 , . . . , ak arising from the additional base functions φn+1 , . . . , φk . Of course, if f , r,
and the φn are complicated functions, it may be necessary to evaluate the integrals
numerically.
   Now let us suppose that there is an infinite sequence of functions φ1 , . . . , φn , . . . ,
that are continuous and orthonormal on the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Suppose further that
as n increases without bound, the mean square error Rn approaches zero. In this
event the infinite series
                                                     ∞
                                                         ai φi (x)
                                                     i=1
is said to converge in the mean square sense (or, more simply, in the mean) to f (x).
Mean convergence is an essentially different type of convergence from the pointwise
convergence considered up to now. A series may converge in the mean without
converging at each point. This is plausible geometrically because the area between
two curves, which behaves in the same way as the mean square error, may be zero
even though the functions are not the same at every point. They may differ on any
finite set of points, for example, without affecting the mean square error. It is less
obvious, but also true, that even if an infinite series converges at every point, it may not
converge in the mean. Indeed, the mean square error may even become unbounded.
An example of this phenomenon is given in Problem 4.
    Now suppose that we wish to know what class of functions, defined on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1,
can be represented as an infinite series of the orthonormal set φi , i = 1, 2, . . . . The
answer depends on what kind of convergence we require. We say that the set
φ1 , . . . , φn , . . . is complete with respect to mean square convergence for a set of
functions F if, for each function f in F, the series
                                                         ∞
                                               f (x) =       ai φi (x),                                (10)
                                                         i=1
with coefficients given by Eq. (9), converges in the mean. There is a similar definition
for completeness with respect to pointwise convergence.
    Theorems having to do with the convergence of series such as that in Eq. (10) can
now be restated in terms of the idea of completeness. For example, Theorem 11.2.4
can be restated as follows: The eigenfunctions of the Sturm–Liouville problem
                              −[p(x)y ] + q(x)y = λr(x)y,              0 < x < 1,                    (11)
                             α1 y(0) + α2 y (0) = 0,           β1 y(1) + β2 y (1) = 0                (12)
are complete with respect to ordinary pointwise convergence for the set of functions
that are continuous on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and that have piecewise continuous derivatives
there.
    If pointwise convergence is replaced by mean convergence,Theorem 11.2.4 can be
considerably generalized. Before we state such a companion theorem to Theorem
11.2.4, we first define what is meant by a square integrable function. A function f is
said to be square integrable on the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 if both f and f 2 are integrable14
on that interval. The following theorem is similar to Theorem 11.2.4 except that it
involves mean convergence.
14 For the Riemann integral used in elementary calculus, the hypotheses that f and f 2 are integrable
are independent; that is, there are functions such that f is integrable but f 2 is not, and conversely (see
Problem 6). A generalized integral, known as the Lebesgue integral, has the property (among others) that
if f 2 is integrable, then f is also necessarily integrable. The term square integrable came into common use
in connection with this type of integration.
Theorem 11.6.1 The eigenfunctions φi of the Sturm–Liouville problem (11), (12) are complete with
               respect to mean convergence for the set of functions that are square integrable on
               0 ≤ x ≤ 1. In other words, given any square integrable function f , the series (10),
               whose coefficients are given by Eq. (9), converges to f (x) in the mean square sense.
                  It is significant that the class of functions specified in Theorem 11.6.1 is very
               large indeed. The class of square integrable functions contains some functions with
               many discontinuities, including some kinds of infinite discontinuities, as well as some
               functions that are not differentiable at any point. All these functions have mean con-
               vergent expansions in the eigenfunctions of the boundary value problem (11), (12).
               However, in many cases these series do not converge pointwise, at least not at every
               point. Thus mean convergence is more naturally associated with series of orthogonal
               functions, such as eigenfunctions, than ordinary pointwise convergence.
                  The theory of Fourier series discussed in Chapter 10 is just a special case of the
               general theory of Sturm–Liouville problems. For instance, the functions
                                                               √
                                                      φn (x) = 2 sin nπx                                 (13)
               are the normalized eigenfunctions of the Sturm–Liouville problem
                                          y + λy = 0,       y(0) = 0,      y(1) = 0.                   (14)
               Thus, if f is a given square integrable function on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, then according to
               Theorem 11.6.1, the series
                                                 ∞                     ∞
                                                                   √ 
                                       f (x) =       bm φm (x) = 2          bm sin mπx,                  (15)
                                                 m=1                   m=1
               where
                                            1                     √  1
                                    bm =       f (x)φm (x) dx = 2         f (x) sin mπx dx,              (16)
                                             0                         0
               converges in the mean. The series (15) is precisely the Fourier sine series discussed
               in Section 10.4. If f satisfies the further conditions stated in Theorem 11.2.4, then this
               series converges pointwise, as well as in the mean. Similarly, a Fourier cosine series
               is associated with the Sturm–Liouville problem
                                         y + λy = 0,        y (0) = 0,    y (1) = 0.                 (17)
               Let f (x) = 1 for 0 < x < 1. Expand f (x) using the eigenfunctions (13), and discuss the point-
  EXAMPLE      wise and mean square convergence of the resulting series.
      1           The series has the form (15), and its coefficients bm are given by Eq. (16). Thus
                                                                      √
                                               √  1                    2
                                        bm = 2         sin mπx dx =       (1 − cos mπ),                   (18)
                                                    0                 mπ
and the nth partial sum of the series is
                                           n
                                                1 − cos mπ
                                Sn (x) = 2                   sin mπx.                        (19)
                                           m=1
                                                     mπ
The mean square error is then
                                           1
                                    Rn =      [f (x) − Sn (x)]2 dx.                          (20)
                                           0
   By calculating Rn for several values of n and plotting the results, we obtain Figure 11.6.2.
This figure indicates that Rn steadily decreases as n increases. Of course,Theorem 11.6.1 asserts
that Rn → 0 as n → ∞. Pointwise, we know that Sn (x) → f (x) = 1 as n → ∞ for 0 < x < 1;
further, Sn (x) has the value zero for x = 0 or x = 1 for every n. Although the series converges
pointwise for each value of x, the least upper bound of the error does not diminish as n grows
larger. For each n there are points close to x = 0 and x = 1 where the error is arbitrarily close
to 1. The situation is similar to Example 1 in Section 10.3; see Figures 10.3.3 and 10.3.4.
                 Rn
               0.20
               0.18
               0.16
               0.14
               0.12
               0.10
               0.08
               0.06
               0.04
               0.02
                   0        2       4      6        8      10       12 14     16 n
       FIGURE 11.6.2       Dependence of the mean square error Rn on n in Example 1.
   Theorem 11.6.1 can be extended to cover self-adjoint boundary value problems
having periodic boundary conditions, such as the problem
                                           y + λy = 0,                                    (21)
                         y(−L) − y(L) = 0,            y (−L) − y (L) = 0                  (22)
considered in Example 4 of Section 11.2. The eigenfunctions of the problem (21), (22)
are φn (x) = cos(nπx/L) for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . and ψn (x) = sin(nπx/L) for n = 1, 2, . . . .
         If f is a given square integrable function on −L ≤ x ≤ L, then its expansion in terms
         of the eigenfunctions φn and ψn is of the form
                                                  ∞
                                           a0                  nπx              nπx
                                 f (x) =     +          an cos        + bn sin            ,             (23)
                                           2                     L                L
                                                 n=1
         where
                                         L
                                      1                  nπx
                               an =          f (x) cos        dx,        n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,           (24)
                                     L    −L              L
                                         L
                                      1                 nπx
                               bn =          f (x) sin        dx,       n = 1, 2, . . . .               (25)
                                     L    −L              L
         This expansion is exactly the Fourier series for f discussed in Sections 10.2 and
         10.3. According to the generalization of Theorem 11.6.1, the series (23) converges
         in the mean for any square integrable function f , even though f may not satisfy the
         conditions of Theorem 10.3.1, which ensure pointwise convergence.
PROBLEMS  1. Extend the results of Example 1 by finding the smallest value of n for which Rn < 0.02,
              where Rn is given by Eq. (20).
                                                              √
          2. Let f (x) = x for 0 < x < 1, and let φm (x) = 2 sin mπx.
              (a) Find the coefficients bm in the expansion of f (x) in terms of φ1 (x), φ2 (x), . . . .
              (b) Calculate the mean square error Rn for several values of n and plot the results.
              (c) Find the smallest value of n for which Rn < 0.01.
          3. Follow the instructions for Problem 2 using f (x) = x(1 − x) for 0 < x < 1.
          4. In this problem we show that pointwise convergence of a sequence Sn (x) does not imply
              mean convergence, and conversely.
                                 √       2
              (a) Let Sn (x) = n xe−nx /2 , 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Show that Sn (x) → 0 as n → ∞ for each x in
              0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Show also that
                                                 1
                                                                         n
                                         Rn =       [0 − Sn (x)]2 dx =     (1 − e−n )
                                                 0                       2
              and hence Rn → ∞ as n → ∞. Thus pointwise convergence does not imply mean con-
              vergence.
              (b) Let Sn (x) = xn for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and let f (x) = 0 for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Show that
                                                 1
                                                                               1
                                          Rn =      [f (x) − Sn (x)]2 dx =         ,
                                                  0                         2n + 1
              and hence Sn (x) converges to f (x) in the mean. Also show that Sn (x) does not converge to
              f (x) pointwise throughout 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Thus mean convergence does not imply pointwise
              convergence.
5. Suppose that the functions φ1 , . . . , φn satisfy the orthonormality relation (1) and that a
   given function f is to be approximated by Sn (x) = c1 φ1 (x) + · · · + cn φn (x), where the coef-
   ficients ci are not necessarily those of Eq. (9). Show that the mean square error Rn given
   by Eq. (6) may be written in the form
                                          1                        n          n
                                   Rn =        r(x)f 2 (x) dx −         a2i +       (ci − ai )2 ,
                                           0                        i=1        i=1
   where the ai are the Fourier coefficients given by Eq. (9). Show that Rn is minimized if
   ci = ai for each i.
6. In this problem we show by examples that the (Riemann) integrability of f and of f 2 are
   independent.
                           
                              x−1/2 , 0 < x ≤ 1,
   (a) Let f (x) =
                              0,       x = 0.
                     1                                                             1
   Show that             f (x) dx exists as an improper integral, but                    f 2 (x) dx does not.
                     0                                                              0
                           
                                 1, x rational,
   (b) Let f (x) =
                              −1, x irrational.
                     1                             1
   Show that             f 2 (x) dx exists, but         f (x) dx does not.
                     0                               0
7. Suppose that it is desired to construct a set of polynomials f0 (x), f1 (x), f2 (x), . . . , fk (x), . . . ,
   where fk (x) is of degree k, that are orthonormal on the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. That is, the set
   of polynomials must satisfy
                                                           1
                                            (fj , fk ) =      fj (x)fk (x) dx = δjk .
                                                            0
   (a) Find f0 (x) by choosing the polynomial of degree zero such that (f0 , f0 ) = 1.
   (b) Find f1 (x) by determining the polynomial of degree one such that (f0 , f1 ) = 0 and
   (f1 , f1 ) = 1.
   (c) Find f2 (x).
   (d) The normalization condition (fk , fk ) = 1 is somewhat awkward to apply. Let g0 (x),
   g1 (x), . . . , gk (x), . . . be the sequence of polynomials that are orthogonal on 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and
   that are normalized by the condition gk (1) = 1. Find g0 (x), g1 (x), and g2 (x), and compare
   them with f0 (x), f1 (x), and f2 (x).
8. Suppose that it is desired to construct a set of polynomials P0 (x), P1 (x), . . . , Pk (x), . . . ,
   where Pk (x) is of degree k, that are orthogonal on the interval −1 ≤ x ≤ 1; see Problem
   7. Suppose further that Pk (x) is normalized by the condition Pk (1) = 1. Find P0 (x), P1 (x),
   P2 (x), and P3 (x). Note that these are the first four Legendre polynomials (see Problem 24
   of Section 5.3).
9. This problem develops some further results associated with mean convergence. Let
   Rn (a1 , . . . , an ), Sn (x), and ai be defined by Eqs. (6), (2), and (9), respectively.
   (a) Show that
                                                       1                     n
                                            Rn =           r(x)f 2 (x) dx −        a2i .
                                                       0                      i=1
   Hint: Substitute for Sn (x) in Eq. (6) and integrate, using the orthogonality relation (1).
                                             1
                                 n
               (b) Show that         a2i ≤       r(x)f 2 (x) dx. This result is known as Bessel’s inequality.
                                 i=1          0
                                 ∞
               (c) Show that         a2i converges.
                                 i=1
                                                 1
                                                                       ∞
               (d) Show that lim Rn =               r(x)f 2 (x) dx −       a2i .
                                 n→∞             0                     i=1
                                 ∞
               (e) Show that         ai φi (x) converges to f (x) in the mean if and only if
                                 i=1
                                                         1                       ∞
                                                             r(x)f 2 (x) dx =         a2i .
                                                          0                       i=1
               This result is known as Parseval’s equation.
           In Problems 10 through 12, let φ1 , φ2 , . . . , φn , . . . be the normalized eigenfunctions of the
           Sturm–Liouville problem (11), (12).
           10. Show that if an is the nth Fourier coefficient of a square integrable function f , then
                lim an = 0.
               n→∞
               Hint: Use Bessel’s inequality, Problem 9(b).
           11. Show that the series
                                                   φ1 (x) + φ2 (x) + · · · + φn (x) + · · ·
               cannot be the eigenfunction series for any square integrable function.
               Hint: See Problem 10.
           12. Show that the series
                                                             φ2 (x)              φn (x)
                                                   φ1 (x) + √ + · · · + √ + · · ·
                                                                 2                   n
               is not the eigenfunction series for any square integrable function.
               Hint: Use Bessel’s inequality, Problem 9(b).
           13. Show that Parseval’s equation in Problem 9(e) is obtained formally by squaring the series
               (10) corresponding to f , multiplying by the weight function r, and integrating term by
               term.
REFERENCES The following books were mentioned in the text in connection with certain theorems about Sturm–
           Liouville problems:
           Birkhoff, G., and Rota, G.-C., Ordinary Differential Equations (4th ed.) (New York: Wiley, 1989).
           Sagan, H., Boundary and Eigenvalue Problems in Mathematical Physics (New York: Wiley, 1961; New
              York: Dover, 1989).
           Weinberger, H. F., A First Course in Partial Differential Equations with Complex Variables and Transform
              Methods (New York: Blaisdell, 1965; New York: Dover, 1995).
           Yosida, K., Lectures on Differential and Integral Equations (New York: Interscience Publishers, 1960; New
              York: Dover, 1991).
   The following book is a convenient source of numerical and graphical data about Bessel and Legendre
functions:
Abramowitz, M., and Stegun, I. A. (eds.), Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs,
   and Mathematical Tables (New York: Dover, 1965); originally published by the National Bureau of
   Standards, Washington, DC, 1964.
   The digital successor to Abramowitz and Stegun is
Digital Library of Mathematical Functions. Release date 2011-08-29. National Institute of Standards and
   Technology from http://dlmf.nist.gov/.
   The following books also contain much information about Sturm–Liouville problems:
Cole, R. H., Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1968).
Hochstadt, H., Differential Equations:A Modern Approach (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1964;
   New York: Dover, 1975).
Miller,R. K.,and Michel,A. N.,Ordinary Differential Equations (NewYork:Academic Press,1982;Mineola,
   NY: Dover, 2007).
Tricomi, F. G., Differential Equations (translated by Elizabeth A. McHarg) (New York: Hafner, 1961;
   Mineola, NY: Dover, 2012).
                Answers to
                Problems
C H A P T E R 1 Section 1.1, page 7
                 1. y → 3/2 as t → ∞                               2. y diverges from 3/2 as t → ∞
                 3. y diverges from −3/2 as t → ∞                  4. y → −1/2 as t → ∞
                 5. y diverges from −1/2 as t → ∞                  6. y diverges from −2 as t → ∞
                 7. y = 3 − y                                    8. y = 2 − 3y
                 9. y = y − 2                                   10. y = 3y − 1
                11. y = 0 and y = 4 are equilibrium solutions; y → 4 if initial value is positive; y diverges from
                    0 if initial value is negative.
                12. y = 0 and y = 5 are equilibrium solutions; y diverges from 5 if initial value is greater than
                    5; y → 0 if initial value is less than 5.
                13. y = 0 is equilibrium solution; y → 0 if initial value is negative; y diverges from 0 if initial
                    value is positive.
                14. y = 0 and y = 2 are equilibrium solutions; y diverges from 0 if initial value is negative;
                    y → 2 if initial value is between 0 and 2; y diverges from 2 if initial value is greater than 2.
                15. (j)           16. (c)         17. (g)        18. (b)          19. (h)          20. (e)
                                           −2       −6
                21. (a) dq/dt = 300(10 − q10 ); q in g, t in h           (b) q → 10 g; no
                                                                                     4
                22. dV/dt = −kV 2/3 for some k > 0.
                23. du/dt = −0.05(u − 70); u in ◦ F, t in min
                24. (a) dq/dt = 500 − 0.4q; q in mg, t in h       (b) q → 1250 mg
                                                          
                25. (a) mv = mg − kv2          (b) v → mg/k           (c) k = 2/49
                26. y is asymptotic to t − 3 as t → ∞
                27. y → 0 as t → ∞
                28. y → ∞, 0, or −∞ depending on the initial value of y
                29. y → ∞ or −∞ depending on the initial value of y
                30. y → ∞ or −∞ or y oscillates depending on the initial value of y
                                                     √
                31. y → −∞ or is asymptotic to 2t − 1 depending on the initial value of y
                32. y → 0 and then fails to exist after some tf ≥ 0
                33. y → ∞ or −∞ depending on the initial value of y
                                                                                                               739
                Section 1.2, page 15
                 1. (a) y = 5 + (y0 − 5)e−t           (b) y = (5/2) + [y0 − (5/2)]e−2t        (c) y = 5 + (y0 − 5)e−2t
                    Equilibrium solution is y = 5 in (a) and (c),y = 5/2 in (b); solution approaches equilibrium
                    faster in (b) and (c) than in (a).
                 2. (a) y = 5 + (y0 − 5)et           (b) y = (5/2) + [y0 − (5/2)]e2t        (c) y = 5 + (y0 − 5)e2t
                    Equilibrium solution is y = 5 in (a) and (c), y = 5/2 in (b); solution diverges from
                    equilibrium faster in (b) and (c) than in (a).
                 3. (a) y = ce−at + (b/a)
                    (c) (i) Equilibrium is lower and is approached more rapidly. (ii) Equilibrium is higher.
                    (iii) Equilibrium remains the same and is approached more rapidly.
                 4. (a) ye = b/a         (b) Y  = aY
                 5. (a) y1 (t) = ce  at
                                            (b) y = ceat + (b/a)
                 6. y = ce−at + (b/a)
                 7. (a) T = 2 ln 18 ∼   = 5.78 months         (b) T = 2 ln[900/(900 − p0 )] months
                    (c) p0 = 900(1 − e−6 ) ∼   = 897.8
                 8. (a) r = (ln 2)/30 day−1           (b) r = (ln 2)/N day−1
                 9. (a) T = 5 ln 50 ∼   = 19.56 s       (b) 718.34 m
                10. (a) dv/dt = 9.8, v(0) = 0              (b) T = 300/4.9 ∼   = 7.82 s        (c) v ∼
                                                                                                     = 76.68 m/s
                11. (b) v = 49 tanh(t/5) m/s           (e) x = 245 ln cosh(t/5) m         (f) T ∼ = 9.48 s
                12. (a) r ∼ = 0.02828 day−1          (b) Q(t) = 100e−0.02828t       (c) T ∼= 24.5 d
                                         ∼
                14. 1620 ln(4/3)/ ln 2 = 672.4 yr
                15. (a) u = T + (u0 − T)e−kt            (b) kτ = ln 2
                16. 6.69 h
                17. (a) Q(t) = CV(1 − e−t/RC )            (b) Q(t) → CV = QL
                    (c) Q(t) = CV exp[−(t − t1 )/RC]
                18. (a) Q = 3(1 − 10−4 Q), Q(0) = 0
                    (b) Q(t) = 104 (1 − e−3t/10 ), t in h; after 1 year Q ∼
                                                   4
                                                                            = 9277.77 g
                             
                    (c) Q = −3Q/10 , Q(0) = 9277.77
                                          4
                    (d) Q(t) = 9277.77e−3t/10 , t in h; after 1 year Q ∼                     (e) T ∼
                                                  4
                                                                           = 670.07 g               = 2.60 yr
                                                                                  −t/300
                19. (a) q = −q/300, q(0) = 5000 g                (b) q(t) = 5000e              (c) no
                    (d) T = 300 ln(25/6) ∼    = 428.13 min ∼   = 7.136 h      (e) r = 250 ln(25/6) ∼ = 356.78 gal/min
                Section 1.3, page 24
                 1. Second order, linear                              2. Second order, nonlinear
                 3. Fourth order, linear                              4. First order, nonlinear
                 5. Second order, nonlinear                           6. Third order, linear
                15. r = −2                                           16. r = ±1
                17. r = 2, −3                                        18. r = 0, 1, 2
                19. r = −1, −2                                       20. r = 1, 4
                21. Second order, linear                             22. Second order, nonlinear
                23. Fourth order, linear                             24. Second order, nonlinear
C H A P T E R 2 Section 2.1, page 39
                 1. (c) y = ce−3t + (t/3) − (1/9) + e−2t ; y is asymptotic to t/3 − 1/9 as t → ∞
                 2. (c) y = ce2t + t 3 e2t /3; y → ∞ as t → ∞
                 3. (c) y = ce−t + 1 + t 2 e−t /2; y → 1 as t → ∞
                 4. (c) y = (c/t) + (3 cos 2t)/4t + (3 sin 2t)/2; y is asymptotic to (3 sin 2t)/2 as t → ∞
                 5. (c) y = ce2t − 3et ; y → ∞ or −∞ as t → ∞
                 6. (c) y = (c − t cos t + sin t)/t 2 ; y → 0 as t → ∞
                                   2        2
                 7. (c) y = t 2 e−t + ce−t ; y → 0 as t → ∞
 8. (c) y = (arctan t + c)/(1 + t 2 )2 ; y → 0 as t → ∞
 9. (c) y = ce−t/2 + 3t − 6; y is asymptotic to 3t − 6 as t → ∞
10. (c) y = −te−t + ct; y → ∞, 0, or −∞ as t → ∞
11. (c) y = ce−t + sin 2t − 2 cos 2t; y is asymptotic to sin 2t − 2 cos 2t as t → ∞
12. (c) y = ce−t/2 + 3t 2 − 12t + 24; y is asymptotic to 3t 2 − 12t + 24 as t → ∞
13. y = 3et + 2(t − 1)e2t
14. y = (t 2 − 1)e−2t /2
15. y = (3t 4 − 4t 3 + 6t 2 + 1)/12t 2
16. y = (sin t)/t 2
17. y = (t + 2)e2t
18. y = t −2 [(π2 /4) − 1 − t cos t + sin t]
19. y = −(1 + t)e−t /t 4 , t  = 0
20. y = (t − 1 + 2e−t )/t, t  = 0
21. (b) y = − 45 cos t + 85 sin t + (a + 45 )et/2 ; a0 = − 45        (c) y oscillates for a = a0
22. (b) y = −3et/3 + (a + 3)et/2 ; a0 = −3               (c) y → −∞ for a = a0
23. (b) y = [2 + a(3π + 4)e2t/3 − 2e−πt/2 ]/(3π + 4); a0 = −2/(3π + 4)
    (c) y → 0 for a = a0
24. (b) y = te−t + (ea − 1)e−t /t; a0 = 1/e              (c) y → 0 as t → 0 for a = a0
25. (b) y = −(cos t)/t 2 + π2 a/4t 2 ; a0 = 4/π2             (c) y → 21 as t → 0 for a = a0
26. (b) y = (et − e + a sin 1)/ sin t; a0 = (e − 1)/ sin 1             (c) y → 1 for a = a0
27. (t, y) = (1.364312, 0.820082)
28. y0 = −1.642876
29. (b) y = 12 + 658 cos 2t + 64   65
                                      sin 2t − 788
                                                65
                                                   e−t/4 ; y oscillates about 12 as t → ∞
    (c) t = 10.065778
30. y0 = −5/2
31. y0 = −16/3; y → −∞ as t → ∞ for y0 = −16/3
39. See Problem 2.
40. See Problem 4.
41. See Problem 6.
42. See Problem 12.
Section 2.2, page 48
 1. 3y2 − 2x3 = c; y  = 0
 2. 3y2 − 2 ln |1 + x3 | = c; x  = −1, y  = 0
 3. y−1 + cos x = c if y  = 0; also y = 0; everywhere
 4. 3y + y2 − x3 + x = c; y  = −3/2
 5. 2 tan 2y − 2x − sin 2x = c if cos 2y  = 0; also y = ±(2n + 1)π/4 for any integer n;
    everywhere
 6. y = sin[ln |x| + c] if x  = 0 and |y| < 1; also y = ±1
 7. y2 − x2 + 2(ey − e−x ) = c; y + ey  = 0
 8. 3y + y3 − x3 = c; everywhere
 9. (a) y = 1/(x √ − x − 6)           (c) −2 < x < 3
                    2
10. (a) y = − 2x − 2x2 + 4               (c) −1 < x < 2
11. (a) y = [2(1 − x)ex − 1]1/2            (c) −1.68 < x < 0.77 approximately
                                                   √
12. (a) r = 2/(1 − 2 ln θ)          (c) 0 < θ < e
13. (a) y = −[2 ln(1 + x2 ) + 4]1/2           (c) −∞ < x < ∞
                     √          −1/2                    √
14. (a) y = 3 − 2 1 + x        2            (c) |x| < 21 5
                       √                              √
15. (a) y = − 21 + 21 4x2 − 15             (c) x > 21 15
                 
16. (a) y = − (x2 + 1)/2              (c) −∞ < x < ∞
                      
17. (a) y = 5/2 − x3 − ex + 13/4               (c) −1.4445 < x < 4.6297 approximately
                        √
18. (a) y = − 34 + 14 65 − 8ex − 8e−x            (c) |x| < 2.0794 approximately
19. (a) y = [π − arcsin (3 cos2 x)]/3          (c) |x − π/2| < 0.6155
                                  1/3
20. (a) y = 23 (arcsin x)2 + 1              (c) −1 < x < 1
21. y3 − 3y2 − x − x3 + 2 = 0, |x| < 1 √
22. y3 − 4y − x3 = −1, |x3 − 1| < 16/3 3 or −1.28 < x < 1.60
23. y = −1/(x2 /2  + 2x − 1); x = −2
24. y = −3/2 + 2x − ex + 13/4; x = ln 2
                   
25. y = −3/2 + sin 2x + 1/4; x = π/4                  26. y = tan(x2 + 2x); x = −1
27. (a) y → 4 if y0 > 0; y = 0 if y0 = 0; y → −∞ if y0 < 0                  (b) T = 3.29527
28. (a) y → 4 as t → ∞             (b) T = 2.84367           (c) 3.6622 < y0 < 4.4042
         c       ad − bc
29. x = y +                ln |ay + b| + k; a  = 0, ay + b  = 0
         a          a2
30. (e) |y + 2x|3 |y − 2x| = c
31. (b) arctan (y/x) − ln |x| = c
32. (b) x2 + y2 − cx3 = 0                             33. (b) |y − x| = c|y + 3x|5 ; also y = x
34. (b) |y + x| |y + 4x| = c
                           2
35. (b) 2x/(x + y) + ln |x + y| = c; also y = −x
36. (b) x/(x + y) + ln |x| = c; also y = −x
37. (b) |x|3 |x2 − 5y2 | = c
38. (b) c|x|3 = |y2 − x2 |
Section 2.3, page 60
 1. t = 100 ln 100 min ∼  = 460.5 min                   2. Q(t) = 120γ[1 − exp(−t/60)];     120γ
 3. Q = 50e−0.2 (1 − e−0.2 ) lb ∼ = 7.42 lb
 4. Q(t) = 200 + t − [100(200)2 /(200 + t)2 ] lb, t < 300; c = 121/125 lb/gal;
     lim c = 1 lb/gal
    t→∞
 5. (a) Q(t) = 63,150   e−t/50 + 25 − 2501
                                        625
                                            cos t + 5002
                                                      25
                                                          sin t
                   2501                 √
    (c) level = 25; amplitude = 25 2501/5002 ∼           = 0.24995
 6. (c) 130.41 s
 7. (a) (ln 2)/r yr         (b) 9.90 yr       (c) 8.66%
 8. (a) k(ert − 1)/r         (b) k ∼ = $3930        (c) 9.77%
 9. k = $3086.64/yr; $1259.92
10. (a) $209,641.74 (20 years);            $250,410.33 (30 years)
    (b) $150,358.26 (20 years);             $289,589.67 (30 years)
11. (a) $1788.77 (20 years);            $1497.54 (30 years)
    (b) $179,303.83 (20 years);             $289,115.13 (30 years)
12. (a) t ∼= 146.54 months           (b) $246,758.02
13. (a) 0.00012097 yr−1           (b) Q0 exp(−0.00012097t), t in yr           (c) 13,305 yr
14. (a) τ ∼= 2.9632; no          (b) τ = 10 ln 2 ∼= 6.9315         (c) τ = 6.3805
15. (b) yc ∼= 0.83
16. t = ln 13
            8
              / ln 12
                   13
                      min ∼ = 6.07 min
17. (a) u(t) = 2000/(1 + 0.048t)1/3           (c) τ ∼= 750.77 s
                    −kt
18. (a) u(t) = ce + T0 + kT1 (k cos ωt + ω sin ωt)/(k2 + ω2 )
    (b) R ∼ = 9.11◦√  F; τ ∼ = 3.51 h
    (c) R = kT1 / k2 + ω2 ; τ = (1/ω) arctan (ω/k)
19. (a) c = k + (P/r) + [c0 − k − (P/r)]e−rt/V ; lim c = k + (P/r)
                                                           t→∞
    (b) T = (V ln 2)/r; T = (V ln 10)/r
    (c) Superior, T = 431 yr; Michigan, T = 71.4 yr; Erie, T = 6.05 yr; Ontario, T = 17.6 yr
20. (a) 50.408 m          (b) 5.248 s
21. (a) 45.783 m          (b) 5.129 s
22. (a) 48.562 m          (b) 5.194 s
23. (a) 176.7 ft/s        (b) 1074.5 ft       (c) 15 ft/s         (d) 256.6 s
24. (a) dv/dx = −μv             (b) μ = (66/25) ln 10 mi−1 ∼      = 6.0788 mi−1
    (c) τ = 900/(11 ln 10) s ∼
                            =
                                    35.533 s
                                                                     
                  m2 g             kv0     mv0                  m          kv0
25. (a) xm = − 2 ln 1 +                 +        ;      tm =       ln 1 +
                   k               mg        k                  k          mg
26. (a) v = −(mg/k) + [v0 + (mg/k)] exp(−kt/m)                     (b) v = v0 − gt; yes
    (c) v = 0 for t > 0
27. (a) vL = 2a2 g(ρ − ρ )/9μ          (b) e = 4πa3 g(ρ − ρ )/3E
28. (a) 11.58 m/s
                         (b) 13.45 m       (c) k ≥ 0.2394 kg/s
29. (a) v = R 2g/(R + x)             (b) 50.6 h
30. (b) x = ut cos A, y = −gt 2 /2 + ut sin A + h
    (d) −16L2 /(u2 cos2 A) + L tan A + 3 ≥ H
    (e) 0.63 rad ≤ A ≤ 0.96 rad             (f) u = 106.89 ft/s, A = 0.7954 rad
31. (a) v = (u cos A)e−rt , w = −g/r + (u sin A + g/r)e−rt
    (b) x = u cos A(1 − e−rt )/r, y = −gt/r + (u sin A + g/r)(1 − e−rt )/r + h
    (d) u = 145.3 ft/s, A = 0.644 rad
32. (d) k = 2.193
Section 2.4, page 76
 1. 0 < t < 3                                           2. 0 < t < 4
 3. π/2 < t < 3π/2                                      4. −∞ < t < −2
 5. −2 < t < 2                                          6. 1 < t < π
 7. 2t + 5y > 0 or 2t + 5y < 0                          8. t 2 + y2 < 1
 9. 1 − t 2 + y2 > 0 or 1 − t 2 + y2 < 0,      t  = 0, y  = 0
10. Everywhere
11. y = 0, y  = 3
12. t = nπ for n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . ;   y = −1       13. y = ± y20 − 4t 2 if y0  = 0;   |t| < |y0 |/2
                      2 −1
14. y = [(1/y0 ) − t ] if y0  = 0; y = 0 if y0 = 0;
                          √
    interval is |t| < 1/ y0 if y0 > 0; −∞ < t < ∞ if y0 ≤ 0
15. y = y0 / 2ty20 + 1 if y0  = 0;    y = 0 if y0 = 0;
    interval is −1/2y20 < t < ∞ if y0  = 0; −∞ < t < ∞ if y0 = 0
16. y = ± 23 ln(1 + t 3 ) + y20 ; −[1 − exp(−3y20 /2)]1/3 < t < ∞
17. y → 3 if y0 > 0; y = 0 if y0 = 0; y → −∞ if y0 < 0
18. y → −∞ if y0 < 0; y → 0 if y0 ≥ 0
19. y → 0 if y0 ≤ 9; y → ∞ if y0 > 9                                       √
20. y → −∞ if y0 < yc ≈ −0.019; otherwise y is asymptotic to t − 1
21. (a) No        (b) Yes; set t0 = 1/2 in Eq. (19) in text.            (c) |y| ≤ (4/3)3/2 ∼
                                                                                           = 1.5396
22. (a) y1 (t) is a solution for t ≥ 2; y2 (t) is a solution for all t
    (b) fy is not continuous at (2, −1)
                                t
                 1         1
26. (a) y = c         +            μ(s)g(s) ds
                μ(t) μ(t) t0
28. y = ±[5t/(2 + 5ct 5 )]1/2                          29. y = r/(k + cre−rt )
                         −2t 1/2
30. y = ±[/(σ + ce )]
                 4  t                  1/2
31. y = ± μ(t)          2     μ(s) ds + c       , where μ(t) = exp(2 sin t + 2Tt)
                           t0
32. y = 21 (1 − e−2t ) for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1; y = 21 (e2 − 1)e−2t for t > 1
33. y = e−2t for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1; y = e−(t+1) for t > 1
Section 2.5, page 88
 1. y = 0 is unstable
 2. y = −a/b is asymptotically stable, y = 0 is unstable
 3. y = 1 is asymptotically stable, y = 0 and y = 2 are unstable
 4. y = 0 is unstable
 5. y = 0 is asymptotically stable
 6. y = 0 is asymptotically stable
 7. (c) y = [y0 + (1 − y0 )kt]/[1 + (1 − y0 )kt]
 8. y = 1 is semistable
 9. y = −1 is asymptotically stable, y = 0 is semistable, y = 1 is unstable
10. y = −1 and y = 1 are asymptotically stable, y = 0 is unstable
11. y = 0 is asymptotically stable, y = b2 /a2 is unstable
12. y = 2 is asymptotically stable, y = 0 is semistable, y = −2 is unstable
13. y = 0 and y = 1 are semistable
15. (a) τ = (1/r) ln 4; 55.452 yr       (b) T = (1/r) ln[β(1 − α)/(1 − β)α]; 175.78 yr
16. (a) y = 0 is unstable, y = K is asymptotically stable
    (b) Concave up for 0 < y ≤ K/e, concave down for K/e ≤ y < K
17. (a) y = K exp{[ln(y0 /K)]e−rt }       (b) y(2) ∼ = 0.7153K ∼ = 57.6 × 106 kg
    (c) τ ∼= 2.215  yr
               
18. (b) (h/a) k/απ; yes         (c) k/α ≤ πa2
19. (b) k2 /2g(αa)2
20. (c) Y = Ey2 = KE[1 − (E/r)]            (d) Ym = Kr/4 for E = r/2
                       
21. (a) y1,2 = K[1 ∓ 1 − (4h/rK)]/2
22. (a) y = 0 is unstable, y = 1 is asymptotically stable
    (b) y = y0 /[y0 + (1 − y0 )e−αt ]
23. (a) y = y0 e−βt      (b) x = x0 exp[−αy0 (1 − e−βt )/β]        (c) x0 exp(−αy0 /β)
24. (b) z = 1/[ν + (1 − ν)eβt ]       (c) 0.0927
25. (a,b) a = 0:√y = 0 is semistable.                     √
    a > 0: y = a is asymptotically stable and y = − a is unstable.
26. (a) a ≤ 0: y = 0 is asymptotically
                                  √ stable. √
    a > 0: y = 0 is unstable; y = a and y = − a are asymptotically stable.
27. (a) a < 0: y = 0 is asymptotically stable and y = a is unstable.
    a = 0: y = 0 is semistable.
    a > 0: y = 0 is unstable and y = a is asymptotically stable.
                                          pq[eα(q−p)t − 1]
28. (a) lim x(t) = min(p, q); x(t) =
         t→∞                                qeα(q−p)t − p
                                  p αt
                                     2
    (b) lim x(t) = p; x(t) =
         t→∞                     pαt + 1
Section 2.6, page 101
 1. x2 + 3x + y2 − 2y = c                           2. Not exact
 3. x3 − x2 y + 2x + 2y3 + 3y = c                   4. x2 y2 + 2xy = c
 5. ax2 + 2bxy + cy2 = k                            6. Not exact
 7. ex sin y + 2y cos x = c; also y = 0             8. Not exact
 9. exy cos 2x + x2 − 3y = c                      10. y ln x + 3x2 − 2y = c
11. Not exact                                   12. x2 + y2 = c
               √                        
13. y = x + 28 − 3x2 /2, |x| < 28/3
14. y = [x − (24x3 + x2 − 8x − 16)1/2 ]/4,     x > 0.9846
15. b = 3; x2 y2 + 2x3 y = c                     16. b = 1; e2xy + x2 = c
19. x2 + 2 ln |y| − y−2 = c; also y = 0          20. ex sin y + 2y cos x = c
21. xy2 − (y2 −2y + 2)ey = c                    22. x2 ex sin y = c
24. μ(t) = exp     R(t) dt,  where t = xy        25. μ(x) = e3x ;    (3x2 y + y3 )e3x = c
26. μ(x) = e−x ; y = cex + 1 + e2x
27. μ(y) = y; xy + y cos y − sin y = c
28. μ(y) = e2y /y; xe2y − ln |y| = c; also y = 0
29. μ(y) = sin y; ex sin y + y2 = c
30. μ(y) = y2 ; x4 + 3xy + y4 = c
31. μ(x, y) = xy; x3 y + 3x2 + y3 = c
Section 2.7, page 110
 1. (a) 1.2, 1.39, 1.571, 1.7439    (b) 1.1975, 1.38549, 1.56491, 1.73658
    (c) 1.19631, 1.38335, 1.56200, 1.73308       (d) 1.19516, 1.38127, 1.55918, 1.72968
 2. (a) 1.1, 1.22, 1.364, 1.5368      (b) 1.105, 1.23205, 1.38578, 1.57179
    (c) 1.10775, 1.23873, 1.39793, 1.59144         (d) 1.1107, 1.24591, 1.41106, 1.61277
 3. (a) 1.25, 1.54, 1.878, 2.2736      (b) 1.26, 1.5641, 1.92156, 2.34359
    (c) 1.26551, 1.57746, 1.94586, 2.38287         (d) 1.2714, 1.59182, 1.97212, 2.42554
 4. (a) 0.3, 0.538501, 0.724821, 0.866458       (b) 0.284813, 0.513339, 0.693451, 0.831571
    (c) 0.277920, 0.501813, 0.678949, 0.815302        (d) 0.271428, 0.490897, 0.665142, 0.799729
 5. Converge for y ≥ 0; undefined for y < 0 6. Converge for y ≥ 0; diverge for y < 0
 7. Converge
 8. Converge for |y(0)| < 2.37 (approximately); diverge otherwise
 9. Diverge
10. Diverge
11. (a) 2.30800, 2.49006, 2.60023, 2.66773, 2.70939, 2.73521
    (b) 2.30167, 2.48263, 2.59352, 2.66227, 2.70519, 2.73209
    (c) 2.29864, 2.47903, 2.59024, 2.65958, 2.70310, 2.73053
    (d) 2.29686, 2.47691, 2.58830, 2.65798, 2.70185, 2.72959
12. (a) 1.70308, 3.06605, 2.44030, 1.77204, 1.37348, 1.11925
    (b) 1.79548, 3.06051, 2.43292, 1.77807, 1.37795, 1.12191
    (c) 1.84579, 3.05769, 2.42905, 1.78074, 1.38017, 1.12328
    (d) 1.87734, 3.05607, 2.42672, 1.78224, 1.38150, 1.12411
13. (a) −1.48849, −0.412339, 1.04687, 1.43176, 1.54438, 1.51971
    (b) −1.46909, −0.287883, 1.05351, 1.42003, 1.53000, 1.50549
    (c) −1.45865, −0.217545, 1.05715, 1.41486, 1.52334, 1.49879
    (d) −1.45212, −0.173376, 1.05941, 1.41197, 1.51949, 1.49490
14. (a) 0.950517, 0.687550, 0.369188, 0.145990, 0.0421429, 0.00872877
    (b) 0.938298, 0.672145, 0.362640, 0.147659, 0.0454100, 0.0104931
    (c) 0.932253, 0.664778, 0.359567, 0.148416, 0.0469514, 0.0113722
    (d) 0.928649, 0.660463, 0.357783, 0.148848, 0.0478492, 0.0118978
15. (a) −0.166134, −0.410872, −0.804660, 4.15867
    (b) −0.174652, −0.434238, −0.889140, −3.09810
16. A reasonable estimate for y at t = 0.8 is between 5.5 and 6. No reliable estimate is possible
    at t = 1 from the specified data.
17. A reasonable estimate for y at t = 2.5 is between 18 and 19. No reliable estimate is possible
    at t = 3 from the specified data.
18. (b) 2.37 < α0 < 2.38                         19. (b) 0.67 < α0 < 0.68
Section 2.8, page 120
 1. dw/ds = (s + 1)2 + (w + 2)2 , w(0) = 0 2. dw/ds = 1 − (w + 3)3 , w(0) = 0
                    n
                         2k t k
 3. (a) φn (t) =                        (c) limn→∞ φn (t) = e2t − 1
                   k=1
                           k!
                    n
                         (−1)k t k
 4. (a) φn (t) =                              (c) limn→∞ φn (t) = e−t − 1
                   k=1
                              k!
                    n
 5. (a) φn (t) =         (−1)k+1 t k+1 /(k + 1)!2k−1                  (c) limn→∞ φn (t) = 4e−t/2 + 2t − 4
                   k=1
                            t n+1
 6. (a) φn (t) = t −                          (c) limn→∞ φn (t) = t
                    n (n + 1)! 2k−1                                                  n
                                     t                                                               t 3k−1
 7. (a) φn (t) =                                                8. (a) φn (t) = −
                   k=1
                          1 · 3 · 5 · · · (2k − 1)                                    k=1
                                                                                            2 · 5 · 8 · · · (3k − 1)
                   t3                    t3         t7                   t3      t7          2t 11               t 15
 9. (a) φ1 (t) =      ;     φ2 (t) =         +           ; φ3 (t) = +                +                   +
                    3                    3        7·9                    3    7 · 9 3 · 7 · 9 · 11 (7 · 9)2 · 15
                                              4                        4
                                            t                        t       3t 7      3t 10          t 13
10. (a) φ1 (t) = t;      φ2 (t) = t − ; φ3 (t) = t − +                              −          +
                                            4                        4      4 · 7 16 · 10 64 · 13
                                            t2        t4     t6
11. (a) φ1 (t) = t,      φ2 (t) = t − + − + O(t ),                       8
                                            2! 4! 6!
                  t2       t3      t4       7t 5       14t 6
    φ3 (t) = t −       + + −                      +          + O(t 7 ),
                 2! 3! 4!                   5!           6!
                  t2       t3     7t 5        31t 6
    φ4 (t) = t −       + −               +            + O(t 7 )
                 2! 3!              5!          6!
                                  t3
12. (a) φ1 (t) = −t − t 2 − ,
                                   2
                     t2       t3      t4       t5       t6
    φ2 (t) = −t − + + − −                                   + O(t 7 ),
                      2       6       4        5       24
                     t2       t4       3t 5       4t 6
    φ3 (t) = −t − +               −          +          + O(t 7 ),
                      2       12       20         45
                     t2       t4      7t 5       t6
    φ4 (t) = −t − + −                       +         + O(t 7 )
                      2       8       60         15
Section 2.9, page 131
 1. yn = (−1)n (0.9)n y0 ; yn → 0 as n → ∞
 2. yn = y0 /(n
              + 1); yn → 0 as n → ∞
 3. yn = y 0 (n + 2)(n + 1)/2;               yn → ∞ as n → ∞
               y0 ,            if n = 4k or n = 4k − 1;
 4. yn =                                                                    y has no limit as n → ∞
             −y0 ,             if n = 4k − 2 or n = 4k − 3; n
 5. yn = (0.5)n (y0 − 12) + 12; yn → 12 as n → ∞
 6. yn = (−1)n (0.5)n (y0 − 4) + 4; yn → 4 as n → ∞
 7. 7.25%
 8. $2283.63
 9. $258.14
10. (a) $804.62          (b) $877.57                (c) $1028.61
11. 30 yrs: $804.62/mo; $289,663.20 total 20 yrs: $899.73/mo; $215,935.20 total
12. $103,624.62
13. 9.73%
16. (b) un → −∞ as n → ∞
19. (a) 4.7263          (b) 1.223%                 (c) 3.5643            (e) 3.5699
                Miscellaneous Problems, page 133
                 1. y = (c/x2 ) + (x3 /5)                                 2. 2y + cos y − x − sin x = c
                                                                                                  2
                 3. x2 + xy − 3y − y3 = 0                                 4. y = −3 + cex−x
                 5. x2 y + xy2 + x = c                                    6. y = x−1 (1 − e1−x )
                 7. x4 + x − y2 − y3 = c                                  8. y = (4 + cos 2 − cos x)/x2
                 9. x2 y + x + y2 = c                                   10. x + ln |x| + x−1 + y − 2 ln |y| = c; also y = 0
                11. (x3 /3) + xy + ey = c                               12. y = ce−x + e−x ln(1 + ex )
                13. y = tan(x + x2 + c)                                 14. x2 + 2xy + 2y2 = 34
                15. y = c/cosh2 (x/2)                                   16. e−x cos y + e2y sin x = c
                                                                                            x
                                                                                                  2
                17. y = ce3x − e2x                                      18. y = e−2x          e−s ds + 3e−2x
                                                                                          0
                19. 2xy + xy3 − x3 = c                                  20. ex + e−y = c
                21. 2xy2 + 3x2 y − 4x + y3 = c                          22. y3 + 3y − x3 + 3x = 2
                          e2t       e−t
                23. y =        +c                                       24. sin y sin2 x = c
                           3t         t
                25. (x2 /y) + arctan(y/x) = c                           26. e−y/x + ln |x| = c
                                          2
                27. (x2 + y2 + 1)e−y       =c                          28. x3 + x2 y = c
                29. arctan(y/x) − ln x2 + y2 = c                        30. (y2 /x3 ) + (y/x2 ) = c
                                                                                        x 2s
                                                                              1               e           x
                31. x3 y2 + xy3 = −4                                    32.      = −x           2
                                                                                                   ds +
                                                                              y          1 s              2
                34. (a) y = t + (c − t)−1             (b) y = t −1 + 2t(c − t 2 )−1      (c) y = sin t + (c cos t − 21 sin t)−1
                35. (a) v − [x(t) + b]v = b
                                 3                 
                    (b) v = b μ(t) dt + c /μ(t),               μ(t) = exp[−(at 2 /2) − bt]
                              −1
                36. y = c1 t + c2 + ln t
                37. y = c1 ln t + c2 + t
                38. y = (1/k) ln |(k − t)/(k + t)| + c2 if c1 = k2 > 0; y = (2/k) arctan(t/k) + c2 if
                    c1 = −k2 < 0; y = −2t −1 + c2 if c1 = 0; also y = c
                                          √
                39. y = ± 23 (t − 2c1 ) t + c1 + c2 ; also y = c            Hint: μ(v) = v−3 is an integrating factor.
                40. y = c1 e + c2 − te−t
                              −t
                41. c12 y = c1 t − ln |1 + c1 t| + c2 if c1  = 0; y = 21 t 2 + c2 if c1 = 0; also y = c
                42. y2 = c1 t + c2
                43. y = c1 sin(t + c2 ) = k1 sin t + k2 cos t
                44. 13 y3 − 2c1 y + c2 = 2t; also y = c                 45. t + c2 = ± 23 (y − 2c1 )(y + c1 )1/2
                46. y ln |y| − y + c1 y + t = c2 ; also y = c           47. ey = (t + c2 )2 + c1
                48. y = 3 (t + 1) − 3
                          4          3/2     1
                                                                        49. y = 2(1 − t)−2
                50. y = 3 ln t − 2 ln(t + 1) − 5 arctan t + 2 + 2 ln 2 + 45 π
                                    3       2                           3
                51. y = 21 t 2 + 23
C H A P T E R 3 Section 3.1, page 144
                 1. y = c1 et + c2 e−3t                                   2. y = c1 e−t + c2 e−2t
                                         −t/3
                 3. y = c1 e + c2 e
                              t/2
                                                                          4. y = c1 et/2 + c2 et
                                    −5t                                                             −3t/2
                 5. y = c1 + c2 e           √                         √ 6. y = c1 e + c2 e
                                                                                      3t/2
                 7. y = c1 exp[(9 + 3     √    5)t/2] + c2 exp[(9√ − 3   5)t/2]
                 8. y = c1 exp[(1 + 3)t] + c2 exp[(1 − 3)t]
                 9. y = et ; y → ∞ as t → ∞
                10. y = 25 e−t − 21 e−3t ; y → 0 as t → ∞
                11. y = 12et/3 − 8et/2 ; y → −∞ as t → ∞
                12. y = −1 − e−3t √     ; y → −1 as t →    √∞                       √                      √
                13. y = 26 1
                             (13 + 5 13) exp[(−5 + 13)t/2] + 261 (13 − 5 13) exp[(−5 − 13)t/2];                    y → 0 as
                    t→∞
              √                      √                √                     √
14. y = (2/ 33) exp[(−1 + 33)t/4] − (2/ 33) exp[(−1 − 33)t/4]; y → ∞ as t → ∞
15. y = 101 e−9(t−1) + 109 et−1 ; y → ∞ as t → ∞
16. y = − 21 e(t+2)/2 + 23 e−(t+2)/2 ; y → −∞ as t → ∞
17. y + y − 6y = 0
18. 2y + 5y + 2y = 0
19. y = 14 et + e−t ; minimum is y = 1 at t = ln 2
20. y = −et + 3et/2 ; maximum is y = 94 at t = ln(9/4), y = 0 at t = ln 9
21. α = −2
22. β = −1
23. y → 0 for α < 0; y becomes unbounded for α > 1
24. y → 0 for α < 1; there is no α for which all nonzero solutions become unbounded
25. (a) y = 15 (1 + 2β)e−2t + 15 (4 − 2β)et/2              (b) y ∼ = 0.71548 when t = 25 ln 6 ∼
                                                                                              = 0.71670
    (c) β = 2
26. (a) y = (6 + β)e−2t − (4 + β)e−3t
    (b) tm = ln[(12 + 3β)/(12 + 2β)], ym = 27               4
                                                              (6 + β)3 /(4 + β)2
                        √
    (c) β = 6(1 + 3) = 16.3923∼                  (d) tm → ln(3/2), ym → ∞
27. (a) y = d/c            (b) aY  + bY  + cY = 0
28. (a) b > 0 and 0 < c < b2 /4a                (b) c < 0 (c) b < 0 and 0 < c < b2 /4a
Section 3.2, page 155
 1. − 27 et/2                                                 2. 1
 3. e−4t                                                      4. x2 ex
 5. −e   2t
                                                              6. 0
 7. 0 < t < ∞                                                 8. −∞ < t < 1
 9. 0 < t < 4                                              10. 0 < t < ∞
11. 0 < x < 3                                              12. 2 < x < 3π/2
14. The equation is nonlinear.                             15. The equation is nonhomogeneous.
16. No                                                     17. 3te2t + ce2t
18. tet + ct                                               19. 5W(f , g)
20. −4(t cos t − sin t)
21. y3 and y4 are a fundamental set of solutions if and only if a1 b2 − a2 b1  = 0.
22. y1 (t) = 13 e−2t + 23 et , y2 (t) = − 13 e−2t + 13 et
23. y1 (t) = − 21 e−3(t−1) + 23 e−(t−1) , y2 (t) = − 21 e−3(t−1) + 21 e−(t−1)
24. Yes
25. Yes
26. Yes                                                    27. Yes
28. (b) Yes           (c) [y1 (t), y3 (t)] and [y1 (t), y4 (t)] are fundamental sets of solutions;
    [y2 (t), y3 (t)] and [y4 (t), y5 (t)] are not
29. ct 2 et                                                30. c cos t
                                                                  √ −x )
                                                                          2
31. c/x                                                    32. c/(1
34. 2/25                                                   35. 3 e ∼   = 4.946
36. p(t) = 0 for all t
40. If t0 is an inflection point, and y = φ(t) is a solution, then from the differential equation
    p(t0 )φ (t0 ) + q(t0 )φ(t
                             0 ) = 0.
                               x
                                   2               2
                                 et /2 dt + c2 e−x /2
                         2
42. Yes, y = c1 e−x /2
                              x0
43. No                      x                                                           
                     1             μ(t)                                        1 cos x
44. Yes, y =               c1            dt + c2 , μ(x) = exp −                  +         dx
                   μ(x)         x0    t                                        x    x
45. Yes, y = c1 x−1 + c2 x
47. x2 μ + 3xμ + (1 + x2 − ν2 )μ = 0
48. (1 − x2 )μ − 2xμ + α(α + 1)μ = 0                    49. μ − xμ = 0
51. The Legendre and Airy equations are self-adjoint.
Section 3.3, page 164
 1. e cos 2 + ie sin 2 ∼ = −1.1312 + 2.4717i                    2. e2 cos 3 − ie2 sin 3 ∼
                                                                                        = −7.3151 − 1.0427i
 3. −1
 4. e2 cos(π/2) − ie2 sin(π/2) = −e2 i ∼        = −7.3891i
 5. 2 cos(ln 2) − 2i sin(ln 2) ∼    = 1.5385 − 1.2779i
 6. π−1 cos(2 ln π) + iπ−1 sin(2 ln π) ∼       = −0.20957 + 0.23959i
 7. y = c1 et cos √
                  t + c2 et sin t √
 8. y = c1 et cos 5 t + c2 et sin 5 t
 9. y = c1 e2t + c2 e−4t                                      10. y = c1 e−t cos t + c2 e−t sin t
             −3t                 −3t
11. y = c1 e cos 2t + c2 e sin 2t                             12. y = c1 cos(3t/2) + c2 sin(3t/2)
13. y = c1 e−t cos(t/2) + c2 e−t sin(t/2)                     14. y = c1 et/3 + c2 e−4t/3
15. y = c1 e−t/2 cos t + c2 e−t/2 sin t                       16. y = c1 e−2t cos(3t/2) + c2 e−2t sin(3t/2)
17. y = 21 sin 2t; steady oscillation
18. y = e−2t cos t + 2e−2t sin t; decaying oscillation
19. y = −et−π/2√sin 2t; growing√oscillation
20. y = (1 + 2 3) cos t − (2 − 3) sin t; steady oscillation
21. y = 3e−t/2 cos t + 25 e−t/2 sin t; decaying oscillation
         √                         √
22. y = 2 e−(t−π/4) cos   √  t + 2 e−(t−π/4)   √ sin t;t/6 decaying
                                                                 √      oscillation
23. (a) u = 2et/6 cos( √     23 t/6) − (2/ √     23)e sin( 23        √t/6)      (b) t = 10.7598
24. (a) u = 2e−t/5 cos(  √      34 t/5) +  (7/  √  34)  e  −t/5
                                                                sin(
                                                                √     34 t/5)       (b) T = 14.5115
25. (a) y = 2e−t cos 5 t +                             −t
                                 √ [(α + 2)/ 5]√e sin 5 t √ (b) α = 1.50878
    (c) t = {π − arctan[2 5/(2 + α)]}/ 5                        (d) π/ 5
26. (a) y = e−at cos t + ae−at sin t             (b) T = 1.8763
    (c) α = 14 , T = 7.4284; α = 21 , T = 4.3003; α = 2, T = 1.5116
35. y = c1 cos(ln t) + c2 sin(ln t)
36. y = c1 t −1 + c2 t −2
37. y = c1 t −1 cos( 21 ln t) + c2 t −1 sin( 21 ln t)         38. y = c1 t 6 + c2 t −1
39. y = c1 t + c2 t
             2       3
                                                              40. y = c1 t cos(2 ln t) + c2 t sin(2 ln t)
41. y = c1 t + c2 t −3                                       42. y = c1 t −3 cos(ln t) + c2 t −3 sin(ln t)
                                                         2
44. Yes, y = c1 cos x + c2 sin x,         x=        e−t /2 dt
45. No                          √                               √
                      2                              2
46. Yes, y = c1 e−t /4 cos( 3 t 2 /4) + c2 e−t /4 sin( 3 t 2 /4)
Section 3.4, page 172
 1. y = c1 et + c2 tet                                          2. y = c1 e−t/3 + c2 te−t/3
 3. y = c1 e−t/2 + c2 e3t/2                                     4. y = c1 e−3t/2 + c2 te−3t/2
 5. y = c1 e cos 3t + c2 e sin 3t
             t                t
                                                                6. y = c1 e3t + c2 te3t
             −t/4        −4t
 7. y = c1 e      + c2 e                                        8. y = c1 e−3t/4 + c2 te−3t/4
 9. y = c1 e2t/5 + c2 te2t/5                                  10. y = e−t/2 cos(t/2) + c2 e−t/2 sin(t/2)
11. y = 2e2t/3 − 73 te2t/3 , y → −∞ as t → ∞
12. y = 2te3t , y → ∞ as t → ∞
13. y = −e−t/3 cos 3t + 59 e−t/3 sin 3t, y → 0 as t → ∞
14. y = 7e−2(t+1) + 5te−2(t+1) , y → 0 as t → ∞
15. (a) y = e−3t/2 − 25 te−3t/2          (b) t = 25
                                     5 −8/5 ∼
    (c) t0 = 16/15, y0 = − 3 e              = −0.33649
    (d) y = e−3t/2 + (b + 23 )te−3t/2 ; b = − 23
16. y = 2et/2 + (b − 1)tet/2 ; b = 1
17. (a) y = e−t/2 + 25 te−t/2          (b) tM = 85 , yM = 5e−4/5 ∼         = 2.24664
    (c) y = e−t/2 + (b + 21 )te−t/2
    (d) tM = 4b/(1 + 2b) → 2 as b → ∞; yM = (1 + 2b) exp[−2b/(1 + 2b)] → ∞
    as b → ∞
18. (a) y = ae−2t/3 + ( 23 a − 1)te−2t/3               (b) a = 23
23. y2 (t) = t 3
24. y2 (t) = t −2
25. y2 (t) = t −1 ln t                                       26. y2 (t) = tet
27. y2 (x) = cos x2 √                                        28. y2 (x) = x
                    −2 x
29. y2 (x) = x1/4 e                                         30. y2 (x) = x−1/2cos x                s          
                         x                                                           t
                                                                                       y−2
                              2                   2
                           eδs /2 ds + c2 e−δx /2
                 2
31. y = c1 e−δx /2                                           32. y2 (t) = y1 (t)        1  (s) exp  −     p(r) dr   ds
                       0                                                           t0                  s0
33. y2 (t) = t −1 ln t                                       34. y2 (t) = cos t 2
35. y2 (x) = x                                               36. y2 (x) = x−1/2 cos x
38. (b) y0 + (a/b)y0                                        40. y = c1 t 2 + c2 t 2 ln t
41. y = c1 t −1/2 + c2 t −1/2 ln t                           42. y = c1 t + c2 t 5/2
43. y = c1 t −1 + c2 t −1 ln t                               44. y = c1 t 3/2 + c2 t 3/2 ln t
45. y = c1 t −2 cos(3 ln t) + c2 t −2 sin(3 ln t)
Section 3.5, page 184
 1. y = c1 e3t + c2 e−t − e2t
 2. y = c1 e−t cos 2t + c2 e−t sin 2t + 17       3
                                                    sin 2t − 12
                                                             17
                                                                 cos 2t
 3. y = c1 e−t + c2 e2t − 27 + 3t − 2t 2
 4. y = c1 e2t + c2 e−3t + 2e3t − 3e−2t
 5. y = c1 e3t + c2 e−t + 16    3
                                  te−t + 38 t 2 e−t            6. y = c1 + c2 e−2t + 23 t − 21 sin 2t − 21 cos 2t
 7. y = c1 cos 3t + c2 sin 3t + 162 (9t − 6t + 1)e + 23
                                        1       2             3t
 8. y = c1 e−t + c2 te−t + t 2 e−t
 9. y = c1 e−t + c2 e−t/2 + t 2 − 6t + 14 − 103 sin t − 109 cos t
10. y = c1 cos t + c2 sin t − 13 t cos 2t − 59 sin 2t
11. u = c1 cos ω0 t + c2 sin ω0 t + (ω02 − ω2 )−1 cos ωt
12. u = c1 cos ω0 t +√c2 sin ω0 t + (1/2ω0 )t sin       √ ω0 t
13. y = c1 e−t/2 cos( 15 t/2) + c2 e−t/2 sin( 15 t/2) + 16 et − 14 e−t
14. y = c1 e−t + c2 e2t + 16 te2t + 18 e−2t
15. y = et − 21 e−2t − t − 21
16. y = 107 sin 2t − 40  19
                             cos 2t + 14 t 2 − 18 + 35 et 17. y = 4tet − 3et + 16 t 3 et + 4
                 2 −t
18. y = e + 3 e − 3 e − te2t
           3t               2 2t
                                                             19. y = 2 cos 2t − 18 sin 2t − 34 t cos 2t
20. y = e−t cos 2t + 21 e−t sin 2t + te−t sin 2t
21. (a) Y(t) = t(A0 t 4 + A1 t 3 + A2 t 2 + A3 t + A4 ) + t(B0 t 2 + B1 t + B2 )e−3t
    + D sin 3t + E cos 3t
    (b) A0 = 2/15, A1 = −2/9, A2 = 8/27, A3 = −8/27, A4 = 16/81, B0 = −1/9,
    B1 = −1/9, B2 = −2/27, D = −1/18, E = −1/18
22. (a) Y(t) = A0 t + A1 + t(B0 t + B1 ) sin t + t(D0 t + D1 ) cos t
    (b) A0 = 1, A1 = 0, B0 = 0, B1 = 1/4, D0 = −1/4, D1 = 0
23. (a) Y(t) = et (A cos 2t + B sin 2t) + (D0 t + D1 )e2t sin t + (E0 t + E1 )e2t cos t
    (b) A = −1/20, B = −3/20, D0 = −3/2, D1 = −5, E0 = 3/2, E1 = 1/2
24. (a) Y(t) = Ae−t + t(B0 t 2 + B1 t + B2 )e−t cos t + t(D0 t 2 + D1 t + D2 )e−t sin t
    (b) A = 3, B0 = −2/3, B1 = 0, B2 = 1, D0 = 0, D1 = 1, D2 = 1
25. (a) Y(t) = A0 t 2 + A1 t + A2 + t 2 (B0 t + B1 )e2t + (D0 t + D1 ) sin 2t + (E0 t + E1 ) cos 2t
    (b) A0 = 1/2, A1 = 1, A2 = 3/4, B0 = 2/3, B1 = 0, D0 = 0, D1 = −1/16,
    E0 = 1/8, E1 = 1/16
26. (a) Y(t) = t(A0 t 2 + A1 t + A2 ) sin 2t + t(B0 t 2 + B1 t + B2 ) cos 2t
    (b) A0 = 0, A1 = 13/16, A2 = 7/4, B0 = −1/12, B1 = 0, B2 = 13/32
27. (a) Y(t) = (A0 t 2 + A1 t + A2 )et sin 2t + (B0 t 2 + B1 t + B2 )et cos 2t +
    e−t (D cos t + E sin t) + Fet
    (b) A0 = 1/52, A1 = 10/169, A2 = −1233/35,152, B0 = −5/52, B1 = 73/676,
    B2 = −4105/35,152, D = −3/2, E = 3/2, F = 2/3
28. (a) Y(t) = t(A0 t + A1 )e−t cos 2t + t(B0 t + B1 )e−t sin 2t + (D0 t + D1 )e−2t cos t +
    (E0 t + E1 )e−2t sin t
    (b) A0 = 0, A1 = 3/16, B0 = 3/8, B1 = 0, D0 = −2/5, D1 = −7/25, E0 = 1/5,
    E1 = 1/25
29. (b) w = − 25 + c1 e5t
                                       N
30. y = c1 cos λt + c2 sin λt +            [am /(λ2 − m2 π2 )] sin mπt
                                      m=1
               t,                                                        0≤t≤π
31. y =
             −(1 + π/2) sin t − (π/2) cos t + (π/2)eπ−t ,                t>π
         
                1
                   − 101 e−t sin 2t − 15 e−t cos 2t,                           0 ≤ t ≤ π/2
32. y =         5
             − 5 (1 + eπ/2 )e−t cos 2t − 101 (1 + eπ/2 )e−t sin 2t,
                1
                                                                               t > π/2
33. No
36. y = c1 e4t + c2 e−t − 21 e2t
Section 3.6, page 190
 1. Y(t) = et                                                2. Y(t) = − 23 te−t
 3. Y(t) = 23 t 2 e−t                                        4. Y(t) = 2t 2 et/2
 5. y = c1 cos t + c2 sin t − (cos t) ln(tan t + sec t)
 6. y = c1 cos 3t + c2 sin 3t + (sin 3t) ln(tan 3t + sec 3t) − 1
 7. y = c1 e−2t + c2 te−2t − e−2t ln t
 8. y = c1 cos 2t + c2 sin 2t + 43 (sin 2t) ln sin 2t − 23 t cos 2t
 9. y = c1 cos(t/2) + c2 sin(t/2) + t sin(t/2) + 2[ln cos(t/2)] cos(t/2)
10. y = c1 et + c2 tet − 21et ln(1 + t 2 ) + tet arctan t
11. y = c1 e2t + c2 e3t +        [e3(t−s) − e2(t−s) ]g(s) ds
                                         
12. y = c1 cos 2t + c2 sin 2t + 21 [sin 2(t − s)]g(s) ds
13. Y(t) = 21 + t 2 ln t
14. Y(t) = −2t 2
15. Y(t) = 21 (t − 1)e2t                                   16. Y(t) = − 21 (2t − 1)e−t
17. Y(x) = 6 x (ln x)
              1 2          3
                                                           18. Y(x) = − 23 x1/2 cos x
                                                                               
                   xe − te
                      t       x
19. Y(x) =                      g(t) dt                    20.  Y(x) =  x −1/2
                                                                                  t −3/2 sin(x − t)g(t) dt
                   (1 − t)2 et             t
23. (b) y = y0 cos t + y0 sin t +             sin(t − s)g(s) ds
                        t                  t0
24. y = (b − a)−1           [eb(t−s) − ea(t−s) ] g(s) ds
               t       t0
25. y = μ−1         eλ(t−s) sin μ(t − s)g(s) ds
          t    t0
26. y =      (t − s)ea(t−s) g(s) ds                        29. y = c1 t + c2 t 2 + 4t 2 ln t
          t0
30. y = c1 t −1 + c2 t −5 + 121 t                          31. y = c1 (1 + t) + c2 et + 21 (t − 1)e2t
32. y = c1 et + c2 t − 21 (2t − 1)e−t
Section 3.7, page 203
 1. u = 5 cos(2t − δ), δ = arctan(4/3) ∼             = 0.9273
 2. u = 2√ cos(t − 2π/3)
 3. u = √2 5 cos(3t − δ), δ = − arctan(1/2) ∼              = −0.4636
 4. u = 13 cos(πt − δ), δ = π + arctan(3/2) ∼                = 4.1244
 5. u = 14 cos 8t ft, t in s; ω = 8 rad/s, T = π/4 s, R = 1/4 ft
 6. u = 57 sin 14t cm, t in s; t = π/14 s
               √          √                 √                         √
 7. u = (1/4 2) sin(8 2 t) − 121 cos(8 2 t) ft, t in s; ω = 8 2 rad/s,
              √                                                            √
    T = π/4 2 s, R = 11/288 ∼           = 0.1954 ft, δ = π − arctan(3/ 2) ∼      = 2.0113
 8. Q = 10−6 cos 2000t  √   C, t in s√          √
 9. u = e−10t
            √ [2 cos(4 6 t) + (5/   √ 6) sin(4 6 t)] cm,√t in s;
                                π/2 6 s, Td /T = 7/2 6 ∼                     ∼
    μ = 4 6√rad/s, Td = √                                       √ 1.4289, τ = 0.4045 s
                                                                =
10. u = (1/8 31)e−2t sin(2 31 t) ft, t in s;           t = π/2 31 s , τ ∼  = 1.5927 s
11. u ∼= 0.057198e−0.15t √ cos(3.87008 t − 0.50709) m, t in s;         μ = 3.87008 rad/s,
    μ/ω0 = 3.87008/ 15 ∼       = 0.99925
12. Q =  10−6 (2e−500t − e−1000t ) C; t in s
13. γ = 20/9 ∼     = 1.4907
         √
16. r = A2 + B2 , r cos θ = B, r sin θ = −A; R = r; δ = θ + (4n + 1)π/2,
    n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
17. γ = 8 lb·s/ft                                     18. R =√103 
20. v0 < −γu0 /2m                                     22. 2π/ 31           √
23. γ = 5 lb·s/ft                                     24. k = 6, v = ±2 5                 
25. (a) τ ∼ = 41.715  (d) γ0 ∼      = 1.73, min τ ∼    = 4.87      (e) τ = (2/γ) ln(400/ 4 − γ 2 )
                                                                           
                                                                             
26. (a) u(t) = e−γt/2m u0 4km − γ 2 cos μt + (2mv0 + γu0 ) sin μt / 4km − γ 2
    (b) R2 = 4m(ku20 + γu0 v0 +     mv0 )/(4km − γ )
                                          2              2
27. ρlu + ρ0 gu = 0, T = 2π ρl/ρ0 g
               √       √
28. (a) u = 2 sin    √ 2 t −t/8 (c)√clockwise
29. (a) u = (16/      127)e     sin( 127 t/8) (c) clockwise
30. (b) u = a cos( k/m t) + b m/k sin( k/m t)
32. (b) u = sin t, A = 1, T = 2π             (c) A = 0.98, T = 6.07
    (d)  = 0.2, A = 0.96, T = 5.90;  = 0.3, A = 0.94, T = 5.74
    (f)  = −0.1, A = 1.03, T = 6.55;  = −0.2, A = 1.06, T = 6.90;                   = −0.3,
    A = 1.11, T = 7.41
Section 3.8, page 217
 1. −2 sin 8t sin t                                     2. 2 sin(t/2) cos(13t/2)
 3. 2 cos(3πt/2) cos(πt/2)                              4. 2 sin(7t/2) cos(t/2)
 5. u + 256u = 16 cos 3t, u(0) = 16 , u (0) = 0, u in ft, t in s
 6. u + 10u + 98u = 2 sin(t/2), u(0) = 0, u (0) = 0.03, u in m, t in s
 7. (a) u = 1482
               151
                    cos 16t + 247
                                16
                                   cos 3t      (c) ω = 16 rad/s
                            −5t
                                    √                          √
 8. (a) u = 153,281 [160e cos( 73 t) + 383,443
                 1
                                                     e−5t sin( 73 t) − 160 cos(t/2) +
                                                7300                                    √
    3128 sin(t/2)]        (b) The first two terms are the transient.           (d) ω = 4 3 rad/s
 9. u = 45 (cos 7t − cos 8t) = 45 sin(t/2) sin(15t/2) ft, t in s
          64                       128
10. u = (cos 8t + sin 8t − 8t cos 8t)/4 ft, t in sec; 1/8, π/8, π/4, 3π/8 s
11. (a) 9018
             (30 cos 2t + sin 2t) ft, t in s        (b) m = 4 slugs
           √
12. u = ⎧( 2/6) cos(3t − 3π/4) m, t in s
         ⎨ F0 (t − sin t),                        0≤t≤π
15. u =        F0 [(2π − t) − 3 sin t],           π < t ≤ 2π
         ⎩
              −4F0 sin t,                       2π < t < ∞
16. Q(t) = 10−6 (e−4000t − 4e−1000t + 3) C, t in s, Q(0.001) ∼      = 1.5468 × 10−6 ;
               ∼                −6
    Q(0.01) = 2.9998 × 10 ; Q(t) → 3 × 10 as t → ∞    −6
                                                                                         √
                √ − ω ) cos ωt + 8ω sin ωt]/(64
17. (a) u = [32(2                                √ − 63ω + 16ω )             (b) A = 8/ 64 − 63ω2 + 16ω4
                          2                                    2       4
    (d) ω = 3 14/8 ∼     = 1.4031, A = 64/ 127 ∼         = 5.6791
18. (a) u = 3(cos t − cos ωt)/(ω2 − 1)
19. (a) u = [(ω2 + 2) cos t − 3 cos ωt]/(ω2 − 1) + sin t
C H A P T E R 4 Section 4.1, page 226
                 1. −∞ < t < ∞                                                2. t > 0 or t < 0
                 3. t > 1, or 0 < t < 1, or t < 0                             4. t > 0
                 5. . . . , −3π/2 < x < −π/2, −π/2 < x < 1, 1 < x < π/2, π/2 < x < 3π/2, . . .
                 6. −∞ < x < −2, −2 < x < 2, 2 < x < ∞
                 7. Linearly independent
                 8. Linearly dependent; f1 (t) + 3f2 (t) − 2f3 (t) = 0
                 9. Linearly dependent; 2f1 (t) + 13f2 (t) − 3f3 (t) − 7f4 (t) = 0
                10. Linearly independent
                11. 1
                12. 1                                                        13. −6e−2t
                      −2t
                14. e                                                        15. 6x
                16. 6/x                                                      17. sin2 t = 101 (5) − 21 cos 2t
                19. (a) a0 [n(n − 1)(n − 2) · · · 1] + a1 [n(n − 1) · · · 2]t + · · · + an t n
                    (b) (a0 r n + a1 r n−1 + · · · + an )ert
                    (c) et , e−t , e2t , e−2t ; yes, W(et , e−t , e2t , e−2t )  = 0, −∞ < t < ∞
                21. W(t) = ce−2t
                22. W(t) = c
                23. W(t) = c/t 2                                             24. W(t) = c/t
                27. y = c1 et + c2 t + c3 tet                                28. y = c1 t 2 + c2 t 3 + c3 (t + 1)
                Section 4.2, page 233
                    √
                 1. 2 ei[(π/4)+2mπ]                                           2. 2ei[(2π/3)+2mπ]
                 3. 3ei(π+2mπ)                                                4. e√i[(3π/2)+2mπ]
                 5. 2ei[(11π/6)+2mπ]√                  √                      6. 2ei[(5π/4)+2mπ]
                 7. 1, 21 (−1 + i 3), 21 (−1 − i 3)                           8. 21/4 e−πi/8 , 21/4 e7πi/8
                                                                                    √          √           √         √
                 9. 1, i, −1, −i                                             10.       3 + i / 2, −          3+i / 2
                11. y = c1 et + c2 tet + c3 e−t                              12. y = c1 et + c2 tet + c3 t 2 et
                                                  −t
                13. y = c1 e + c2 e + c3 e √
                               t        2t
                                                                             14. y = c1 +√ c2 t + c3 e2t + c4 te2t
                15. y = c1 cos t + c2 sin t + e 3t/2 (c3 cos 21 t + c4 sin 21 t) + e− 3t/2 (c5 cos 21 t + c6 sin 21 t)
                16. y = c1 et + c2 e−t + c3 e2t + c4 e−2t
                17. y = c1 et + c2 tet + c3 t 2 et + c4 e−t + c5 te−t + c6 t 2 e−t
                18. y = c1 + c2 t + c3 et + c4 e−t + c5 cos t + c6 sin t
                19. y = c1 + c2 et + c3 e2t + c4 cos   √ t + c5 sin t √
                20. y = c1 + c2 e2t + e−t (c3 cos 3 t + c4 sin 3 t)
                21. y = et [(c1 + c2 t) cos t + (c3 + c4 t) sin t] + e−t [(c5 + c6 t) cos t + (c7 + c8 t) sin t]
                22. y = (c1 + c2 t) cos√t + (c3 + c4√t) sin t
                23. y = c1 et + c2 e(2+ 5)t√ + c3 e(2− 5)t √
                24. y = c1 e−t + c2 e(−2+ 2)t + c3√     e(−2− 2)t                 √
                               −t/2         −t/3
                25. y = c1 e        + c2 e       cos(t/√ 3) + c3 e−t/3
                                                                    √ sin(t/ 3)
                26. y = c1 e3t + c2 e−2t + c3 e(3+ 3)t + c4 e(3− 3)t
                27. y = c1 e−t/3 + c2 e−t/4 + c3 e−t cos 2t + c4 e√      −t
                                                                            sin 2t             √
                28. y = c1 e cos t + c2 e sin t + c3 e cos( 3 t) + c4 e−2t sin( 3 t)
                               −t                −t            −2t
                29. y = 2 − 2√cos t + sin    √ t         √         √
                30. y = 21 e−t/ 2 sin(t/ 2) − 21 et/ 2 sin(t/ 2)
                31. y = 2t − 3                                               32. y = 2 cos t − sin t
                33. y = − 23 et − 101 e2t − 16 e−2t − 16 15
                                                            e −t/2
                                                                             34. y = 13  2 −t
                                                                                           e + 2413
                                                                                                    et/2 cos t + 13
                                                                                                                  3 t/2
                                                                                                                    e sin t
                                    −t/3         −t/2
                35. y = 8 − 18e            + 8e                                         √
                            21 −t            38 −t          8 −2t
                                                                         √          17 3 −2t         √
                36. y = 13 e cos t − 13 e sin t − 13 e cos( 3 t) +                          e sin( 3 t)
                                                                                       39
37. y = 21 (cosh t − cos t) + 21 (sinh t − sin t)
38. (a) W(t) = c, a constant              (b) √W(t) = −8 √ (c) W(t) = 4
39. (b) u1 = c1 cos t + c2 sin t + c3 cos 6 t + c4 sin 6 t
Section 4.3, page 239
 1. y = c1 et + c2 tet + c3 e−t + 21 te−t + 3
 2. y = c1 et + c2 e−t + c3 cos t + c4 sin t − 3t − 14 t sin t
 3. y = c1 e−t + c2 cos t + c3 sin t + 21 te−t + 4(t − 1)
 4. y = c1 + c2 et + c3 e−t + cos t
 5. y = c1 + c2 t + c3 e−2t + c4 e2t − 13 et − 481 t 4 − 16
                                                         1 2
                                                            t
 6. y = c1 cos t + c2 sin t + c3 t cos t + c4 t sin t + 3 + 19 cos 2t
                                                     √                    √
 7. y = c1 + c2 t + c3 t 2 + c4 e−t + et/2 [c5 cos( 3 t/2) + c6 sin( 3 t/2)] + 241 t 4
 8. y = c1 + c2 t + c3 t 2 + c4 e−t + 201 sin 2t + 401 cos 2t
 9. y = 16 3
             (1 − cos 2t) + 18 t 2
10. y = (t − 4) cos t − ( 23 t + 4) sin t + 3t + 4
11. y = 1 + 14 (t 2 + 3t) − tet
12. y = − 25 cos t − 45 sin t + 201 e−t + 4081 t    73 −3t
                                              e + 520   e + 77   65
                                                                    cos 2t − 130
                                                                               49
                                                                                   sin 2t
13. Y(t) = t(A0 t + A1 t + A2 t + A3 ) + Bt e
                     3        2                     2 t
14. Y(t) = t(A0 t + A1 )e−t + B cos t + C sin t
15. Y(t) = At 2 et + B cos t + C sin t
16. Y(t) = At 2 + (B0 t + B1 )et + t(C cos 2t + D sin 2t)
17. Y(t) = t(A0 t 2 + A1 t + A2 ) + (B0 t + B1 ) cos t + (C0 t + C1 ) sin t
18. Y(t) = Aet + (B0 t + B1 )e−t + te−t (C cos t + D sin t)
19. k0 = a0 , kn = a0 αn + a1 αn−1 + · · · + an−1 α + an
Section 4.4, page 244
 1. y = c1 + c2 cos t + c3 sin t − ln cos t − (sin t) ln(sec t + tan t)
 2. y = c1 + c2 et + c3 e−t − 21 t 2
 3. y = c1 et + c2 e−t + c3 e2t + 301 e4t
 4. y = c1 + c2 cos t + c3 sin t + ln(sec t + tan t) − t cos t + (sin t) ln cos t
 5. y = c1 et + c2 cos t + c3 sin t − 15 e−t cos t
 6. y = c1 cos t + c2 sin t + c3 t cos t + c4 t sin t − 18 t 2 sin t
 7. y = c1 et + c2 cos t + c3 sin t − 21 (cos t) ln cos t + 21 (sin t) ln cos t − 21 t cos t
                          t
    − 21 t sin t + 21 et      e−s / cos s ds
                           t0
                                                                      t
 8. y = c1 + c2 et + c3 e−t − ln sin t + ln(cos t + 1) + 21 et            e−s / sin s ds
               t                                                    t0
    + 21 e−t        es / sin s ds
               t0
 9. c1 = 0, c2 = 2, c3 = 1 in answer to Problem 4
10. c1 = 2, c2 = 78 , c3 = − 78 , c4 = 21 in answer to Problem 6
11. c1 = 23 , c2 = 21 , c3 = − 25 , t0 = 0 in answer to Problem 7
12. c1 = 3, c2 = 0, c3 = −eπ/2 , t0 = π/2 in answer to Problem 8
13. Y(x) = x4 /15
                  t
14. Y(t) = 21        [et−s − sin(t − s) − cos(t − s)]g(s) ds
                  t0
                  t
15. Y(t) = 21        [sinh(t − s) − sin(t − s)]g(s) ds
                  t0
                                 t
                16. Y(t) = 21        e(t−s) (t − s)2 g(s) ds; Y(t) = −tet ln |t|
                                 t0
                                 x
                17. Y(x) = 21        [(x/t 2 ) − 2(x2 /t 3 ) + (x3 /t 4 )]g(t) dt
                                  x0
C H A P T E R 5 Section 5.1, page 253
                 1. ρ = 1                                                     2. ρ = 2
                 3. ρ = ∞                                                     4. ρ = 21
                 5. ρ = 21                                                    6. ρ = 1
                 7. ρ = 3                                                     8. ρ = e
                    ∞
                         (−1)n x2n+1                                              ∞
                                                                                       xn
                 9.                     ,    ρ=∞                            10.           ,  ρ=∞
                    n=0
                          (2n + 1)!                                               n=0
                                                                                       n!
                11. 1 + (x − 1), ρ = ∞                                      12. 1 − 2(x + 1) + (x + 1)2 ,      ρ=∞
                    ∞
                                   (x − 1)n                                       ∞
                13.     (−1)n+1                , ρ=1                        14.       (−1)n xn , ρ = 1
                    n=1
                                        n                                         n=0
                    ∞                                                            ∞
                15.      xn ,   ρ=1                                         16.       (−1)n+1 (x − 2)n ,  ρ=1
                    n=0                                                           n=0
                     
                17. y = 1 + 22 x + 32 x2 + 42 x3 + · · · + (n + 1)2 xn + · · ·
                    y = 22 + 32 · 2x + 42 · 3x2 + 52 · 4x3 + · · · + (n + 2)2 (n + 1)xn + · · ·
                18. y = a1 + 2a2 x + 3a3 x2 + 4a4 x3 + · · · + (n + 1)an+1 xn + · · ·
                          ∞                   ∞
                       =       nan xn−1 =          (n + 1)an+1 xn
                          n=1                  n=0
                    y = 2a2 + 6a3 x + 12a4 x2 + 20a5 x3 + · · · + (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 xn + · · ·
                           ∞                           ∞
                        =      n(n − 1)an xn−2 =            (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 xn
                           n=2                          n=0
                    ∞
                21.     (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 xn
                    n=0
                    ∞
                22.      an−2 xn
                    n=2
                    ∞                                                            ∞
                23.     (n + 1)an xn                                        24.        [(n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 − n(n − 1)an ]xn
                    n=0                                                           n=0
                    ∞                                                                  ∞
                25.      [(n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 + nan ]xn                      26. a1 +        [(n + 1)an+1 + an−1 ]xn
                    n=0                                                                 n=1
                    ∞
                27.     [(n + 1)nan+1 + an ]xn                              28. an = (−2)n a0 /n!,      n = 1, 2, . . . ; a0 e−2x
                    n=0
                Section 5.2, page 263
                 1. (a) an+2 = an /(n + 2)(n + 1)
                                              x2     x4     x6             ∞
                                                                                 x2n
                    (b, d) y1 (x) = 1 +           +      +      + ··· =                 = cosh x
                                               2!    4!      6!            n=0
                                                                                (2n)!
                                     x3      x5     x7           ∞
                                                                          x2n+1
                    y2 (x) = x +         +       +     + ··· =                      = sinh x
                                     3!      5!     7!           n=0
                                                                        (2n + 1)!
 2. (a) an+2 = an /(n + 2)
                            x2        x4            x6               ∞
                                                                             x2n
    (b, d) y1 (x) = 1 +          +           +            + ··· =
                            2        2·4 2·4·6                       n=0
                                                                            2n n!
                  x 3
                            x 5
                                          x 7                2 n!x
                                                             ∞     n     2n+1
    y2 (x) = x +       +          +               + ··· =
                   3      3·5 3·5·7                         n=0
                                                                 (2n + 1)!
 3. (a) (n + 2)an+2 − an+1 − an = 0
    (b) y1 (x) = 1 + 21 (x − 1)2 + 16 (x − 1)3 + 16 (x − 1)4 + · · ·
    y2 (x) = (x − 1) + 21 (x − 1)2 + 21 (x − 1)3 + 14 (x − 1)4 + · · ·
 4. (a) an+4 = −k2 an /(n + 4)(n + 3); a2 = a3 = 0
                            k 2 x4           k 4 x8               k6 x12
    (b, d) y1 (x) = 1 −             +                  −                             + ···
                            3·4         3 · 4 · 7 · 8 3 · 4 · 7 · 8 · 11 · 12
                  ∞
                                  (−1) (k x )
                                         m+1      2  4 m+1
           =1+
                  m=0
                        3 · 4  · 7 · 8 · · · (4m + 3)(4m + 4)
                  k 2 x5          k 4 x9                  k6 x13
    y2 (x) = x −          +                    −                            + ···
                  4·5         4 · 5 · 8 · 9 4 · 5 · 8 · 9 · 12 · 13
                                                                         
                       ∞
                                      (−1)m+1 (k2 x4 )m+1
           =x 1+
                      m=0
                            4 · 5 · 8 · 9 · · · (4m + 4)(4m + 5)
    Hint: Let n = 4m in the recurrence relation, m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
 5. (a) (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 − n(n + 1)an+1 + an = 0, n ≥ 1; a2 = − 21 a0
    (b) y1 (x) = 1 − 21 x2 − 16 x3 − 241 x4 + · · · , y2 (x) = x − 16 x3 − 121 x4 − 24               x + ···
                                                                                                   1 5
 6. (a) an+2 = −(n − 2n + 4)an /[2(n + 1)(n + 2)], n ≥ 2; a2 = −a0 , a3 = − 14 a1
                       2
    (b) y1 (x) = 1 − x2 + 16 x4 − 301 x6 + · · · ,
    y2 (x) = x − 14 x3 + 160 7 5
                                 x − 192019 7
                                              x + ···
 7. (a) an+2 = −an /(n + 1), n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
                            x2        x4            x6                      ∞
                                                                                        (−1)n x2n
    (b, d) y1 (x) = 1 −          +           −            + ··· = 1 +
                            1        1·3 1·3·5                              n=1
                                                                                 1 · 3 · 5 · · · (2n − 1)
                  x 3
                            x 5
                                          x 7                    ∞
                                                                           (−1)n x2n+1
    y2 (x) = x −       +          −               + ··· = x +
                   2      2·4 2·4·6                              n=1
                                                                       2 · 4 · 6 · · · (2n)
 8. (a) an+2 = −[(n + 1)2 an+1 + an + an−1 ]/(n + 1)(n + 2),                       n = 1, 2, . . .
    a2 = −(a0 + a1 )/2
    (b) y1 (x) = 1 − 21 (x − 1)2 + 16 (x − 1)3 − 121 (x − 1)4 + · · ·
    y2 (x) = (x − 1) − 21 (x − 1)2 + 16 (x − 1)3 − 16 (x − 1)4 + · · ·
 9. (a) (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 + (n − 2)(n − 3)an = 0; n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
    (b) y1 (x) = 1 − 3x2 , y2 (x) = x − x3 /3
10. (a) 4(n + 2)an+2 − (n − 2)an = 0; n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
                            x2                         x3      x5         x7                         x2n+1
    (b, d) y1 (x) = 1 − , y2 (x) = x −                     −        −            − ··· − n                     − ···
                            4                          12 240 2240                          4 (2n − 1)(2n + 1)
11. (a) 3(n + 2)an+2 − (n + 1)an = 0; n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
                            x2       x4         5 6              3 · 5 · · · (2n − 1) 2n
    (b, d) y1 (x) = 1 +          +        +         x + ··· + n                         x + ···
                            6        24 432                      3 · 2 · 4 · · · (2n)
                  2           8 5           16 7                   2 · 4 · · · (2n)
    y2 (x) = x + x3 +              x +           x + ··· + n                              x2n+1 + · · ·
                  9         135            945                3 · 3 · 5 · · · (2n + 1)
12. (a) (n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 − (n + 1)nan+1 + (n − 1)an = 0; n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
                            x2       x3       x4            xn
    (b, d) y1 (x) = 1 +          +       +        + ··· +       + · · · , y2 (x) = x
                            2        6        24            n!
13. (a) 2(n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 + (n + 3)an = 0; n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
                              3        5           7 6                        3 · 5 · · · (2n + 1) 2n
    (b, d) y1 (x) = 1 − x2 + x4 −                      x + · · · + (−1)n                            x + ···
                              4       32          384                               2n (2n)!
                   x3       x5       x7                      4 · 6 · · · (2n + 2) 2n+1
    y2 (x) = x −       +         −       + · · · + (−1)n                           x         + ···
                    3      20 210                                2n (2n + 1)!
14. (a) 2(n + 2)(n + 1)an+2 + 3(n + 1)an+1 + (n + 3)an = 0; n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
    (b) y1 (x) = 1 − 34 (x − 2)2 + 38 (x − 2)3 + 641 (x − 2)4 + · · ·
    y2 (x) = (x − 2) − 34 (x − 2)2 + 24      1
                                                (x − 2)3 + 64  9
                                                                  (x − 2)4 + · · ·
15. (a) y = 2 + x + x + 3 x + 4 x + · · ·
                           2      1 3    1 4
                                                            (c) about |x| < 0.7
16. (a) y = −1 + 3x + x2 − 43 x3 − 16 x4 + · · ·                  (c) about |x| < 0.7
17. (a) y = 4 − x − 4x2 + 21 x3 + 43 x4 + · · ·               (c) about |x| < 0.5
18. (a) y = −3 + 2x − 23 x2 − 21 x3 − 18 x4 + · · ·                 (c) about |x| < 0.9
19. (a) y1 (x) = 1 − 13 (x − 1)3 − 121 (x − 1)4 + 181 (x − 1)6 + · · ·
    y2 (x) = (x − 1) − 41 (x − 1)4 − 201 (x − 1)5 + 281 (x − 1)7 + · · ·
                         λ          λ(λ − 4) 4 λ(λ − 4)(λ − 8) 6
21. (a) y1 (x) = 1 − x2 +                       x −                          x + ···
                         2!             4!                       6!
                   λ − 2 3 (λ − 2)(λ − 6) 5 (λ − 2)(λ − 6)(λ − 10) 7
    y2 (x) = x −            x +                        x −                                    x + ···
                      3!                   5!                                7!
    (b) 1, x, 1 − 2x2 , x − 23 x3 , 1 − 4x2 + 43 x4 , x − 43 x3 + 15          4 5
                                                                                x
    (c) 1, 2x, 4x2 − 2, 8x3 − 12x, 16x4 − 48x2 + 12, 32x5 − 160x3 + 120x
22. (b) y = x − x3 /6 + · · ·
Section 5.3, page 269
 1. φ (0) = −1,         φ (0) = 0,            φ(4) (0) = 3
                          
 2. φ (0) = 0,            φ (0) = −2,              φ(4) (0) = 0
                          
 3. φ (1) = 0,            φ (1) = −6,              φ(4) (1) = 42
 4. φ (0) = 0,          φ (0) = −a0 ,         φ(4) (0) = −4a1
 5. ρ = ∞, ρ = ∞
 6. ρ = 1, ρ = 3,   √ ρ=1
 7. ρ = 1, ρ = 3
 8. ρ = 1
 9. (a) ρ = √  ∞       (b) ρ = ∞              (c) ρ = ∞              (d) ρ = ∞              (e) ρ = 1
    (f) ρ = √2          (g) ρ = ∞              (h) ρ = 1            (i) ρ = 1            (j) ρ = 2
    (k) ρ = 3            (l) ρ = 1          (m) ρ = ∞                (n) ρ = ∞
                         α2 2 (22 − α2 )α2 4 (42 − α2 )(22 − α2 )α2 6
10. (a) y1 (x) = 1 − x −                            x −                                   x − ···
                         2!                4!                             6!
              [(2m − 2)2 − α2 ] · · · (22 − α2 )α2 2m
           −                                              x − ···
                                 (2m)!
                   1 − α2 3 (32 − α2 )(1 − α2 ) 5
    y2 (x) = x +              x +                           x + ···
                      3!                       5!
                 [(2m − 1)2 − α2 ] · · · (1 − α2 ) 2m+1
             +                                           x       + ···
                                (2m + 1)!
    (b) y1 (x) or y2 (x) terminates with x as α = n is even or odd
                                                    n
    (c) n = 0, y = 1; n = 1, y = x; n = 2, y = 1 − 2x2 ; n = 3, y = x − 43 x3
11. y1 (x) = 1 − 16 x3 + 120   1 5
                                  x + 180
                                        1 6
                                           x + · · · , y2 (x) = x − 121 x4 + 180           x + 504
                                                                                         1 6
                                                                                                     x + ···,
                                                                                                   1 7
    ρ=∞
12. y1 (x) = 1 − 16 x3 + 121 x4 − 401 x5 + · · · , y2 (x) = x − 121 x4 + 201 x5 − 601 x6 + · · · ,
    ρ=∞
13. y1 (x) = 1 + x2 + 121 x4 + 120     1 6
                                           x + · · · , y2 (x) = x + 16 x3 + 601 x5 + 5601 7
                                                                                           x + ···,
    ρ = π/2
14. y1 (x) = 1 + 16 x3 + 121 x4 − 120     1 6
                                             x + · · · , y2 (x) = x − 16 x3 + 241 x4 + 120  x + ···,
                                                                                          7 5
    ρ=1
15. Cannot specify arbitrary initial conditions at x = 0; hence x = 0 is a singular point.
                    x2              xn
16. y = 1 + x +          + ··· +          + · · · = ex
                    2!              n!
               x2        x4         x6                    x2n
17. y = 1 +       +            +              + ··· + n         + ···
                2     2·4 2·4·6                         2 · n!
18. y = 1 + x + 2 x + 2 x + · · ·
                    1 2        1 3
                                                      1
19. y = 1 + x + x2 + · · · + xn + · · · =
                                                   1−x 
                          x2                xn                  x3     x4           xn
20. y = a0 1 + x +              + ··· +        + ··· + 2            +     + ··· +      + ···
                           2!               n!                  3!     4!           n!
                                            2
                                           x
      = a0 e x + 2 e x − 1 − x −                 = cex − 2 − 2x − x2
                                            2
            
                    x2         x4        x6              (−1)n x2n
21. y = a0 1 −           + 2 − 3 + ··· +                             + ···
                     2        2 2! 2 3!                     2n n!
            
                    x2        x3     x4          x5
         + x+            −       −          +         + ···
                    2         3     2·4 3·5
                        
                2                x2     x3        x4       x5
      = a0 e−x /2 + x +             −         −        +        + ···
                                 2        3      2·4 3·5
23. 1, 1 − 3x2 , 1 − 10x2 + 353 x4 ; x, x − 53 x3 , x − 143 x3 + 21         5
                                                                              x5
24. (a) 1, x, (3x − 1)/2, (5x − 3x)/2, (35x − 30x + 3)/8, (63x5 − 70x3 + 15x)/8
                    2                   3                   4        2
    (c) P1 , 0; P2 , ±0.57735; P3 , 0, ±0.77460; P4 , ±0.33998, ±0.86114;
    P5 , 0, ±0.53847, ±0.90618
Section 5.4, page 280
 1. y = c1 x−1 + c2 x−2                                        2. y = c1 |x + 1|−1/2 + c2 |x + 1|−3/2
 3. y = c1 x + c2 x ln |x|
             2         2
                                                               4. y = c1 x−1 cos(2 ln |x|) + c2 x−1 sin(2 ln |x|)
 5. y = c1 x + c2 x√ln |x|                   √                 6. y = c1 (x − 1)−3 + c2 (x − 1)−4
               (−5+ 29)/2             (−5− 29)/2
 7. y = c1 |x|             √+ c2 |x|                         √
 8. y = c1 |x|3/2 cos( 21 3 ln |x|) + c2 |x|3/2 sin( 21 3 ln |x|)
 9. y = c1 x + c2 x ln |x|
             3         3
10. y = c1 (x − 2)−2 cos(2    √ ln |x − 2|) + c2 (x − 2) 1 √
                                                              −2
                                                                  sin(2 ln |x − 2|)
               −1/2                                   −1/2
11. y = c1 |x|      cos( 2 15 ln |x|) + c2 |x|
                            1
                                                           sin( 2 15 ln |x|)
12. y = c1 x + c2 x4
13. y = 2x3/2 − x−1
14. y = 2x−1/2 cos(2 ln x) − x−1/2 sin(2 ln x)                15. y = 2x2 − 7x2 ln |x|
           −1
16. y = x cos(2 ln x)                                         17. x = 0, regular
18. x = 0, regular; x = 1, irregular                          19. x = 0, irregular; x = 1, regular
20. x = 0, irregular; x = ±1, regular                         21. x = 1, regular; x = −1, irregular
22. x = 0, regular                                            23. x = −3, regular
24. x = 0, −1, regular; x = 1, irregular                      25. x = 1, regular; x = −2, irregular
26. x = 0, 3, regular                                         27. x = 1, −2, regular
28. x = 0, regular                                            29. x = 0, irregular
30. x = 0, regular                                            31. x = 0, regular
32. x = 0, ±nπ, regular                                       33. x = 0, ±nπ, regular
34. x = 0, irregular; x = ±nπ, regular                        35. α < 1
36. β > 0                                                     37. γ = 2
38. α > 1
39. (a) α < 1 and β > 0             (b) α < 1 and β ≥ 0, or α = 1 and β > 0
    (c) α > 1 and β > 0             (d) α > 1 and β ≥ 0, or α = 1 and β > 0
    (e) α =  1 and  β  >  0
                    x2            x4
41. y = a0 1 −           +                    − ···         44. Irregular singular point
                   2·5 2·4·5·9
45. Regular singular point                                  46. Regular singular point
47. Irregular singular point                                48. Irregular singular point
49. Irregular singular point
Section 5.5, page 286
                                                    an−2
 1. (b) r(2r − 1) = 0;        an = −                                ;    r1 = 21 , r2 = 0
                                         (n + r)[2(n + r) − 1]
                       
                                x2              x4                    x6
    (c) y1 (x) = x1/2 1 −             +                  −                           + ···
                               2 · 5 2 · 4 · 5 · 9  2 · 4 · 6 · 5 · 9 · 13
                         (−1)n x2n
             + n                                  + ···
                2 n!5 · 9 · 13 · · · (4n + 1)
                         x2              x4                   x6
    (d) y2 (x) = 1 −           +                  −                         + ···
                       2 · 3 2 · 4 · 3 · 7 2 · 4 · 6 · 3 · 7 · 11
                          (−1) xn 2n
             + n                                   + ···
                 2 n!3 · 7 · 11 · · · (4n − 1)
                                            an−2
 2. (b) r 2 − 19 = 0; an = −                         ; r1 = 13 , r2 = − 13
                                    (n + r)2 − 19
                                     1          x 2               1                x 4
    (c) y1 (x) = x1/3 1 −                            +                                 + ···
                               1!(1 + 3 ) 21
                                                         2!(1 + 3 )(2 + 3 ) 2
                                                                 1         1
                                                                                    
                                            (−1)m                   x 2m
                       +                                                   +   · · ·
                         m!(1 + 13 )(2 + 13 ) · · · (m + 13 ) 2
                                        1         x 2               1                x 4
    (d) y2 (x) = x−1/3 1 −                             +                                 + ···
                                 1!(1 − 3 ) 21
                                                           2!(1 − 3 )(2 − 3 ) 2
                                                                   1         1
                                                                                     
                                            (−1)m                   x 2m
                       +                                                   +   · · ·
                         m!(1 − 13 )(2 − 13 ) · · · (m − 13 ) 2
    Hint: Let n = 2m in the recurrence relation, m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
                                                 an−1
 3. (b) r(r − 1) = 0; an = −                                   ; r1 = 1, r2 = 0
                                      (n    + r)(n + r − 1)                   
                             x          x 2
                                                          (−1)n
    (c) y1 (x) = x 1 −            +           + ··· +               xn + · · ·
                           1!2! 2!3!                    n!(n + 1)!
                              an−1
 4. (b) r = 0; an =
          2
                                        ; r1 = r2 = 0
                           (n + r)2
                                       2
                         x           x                  xn
    (c) y1 (x) = 1 +           +             + ··· +         + ···
                       (1!) 2      (2!)  2            (n!)2
                                                    an−2
 5. (b) r(3r − 1) = 0; an = −                                       ; r1 = 13 , r2 = 0
                                         (n + r)[3(n + r) − 1]
                                                            2 2
                                1 x2                 1        x
    (c) y1 (x) = x1/3 1 −                      +                     + ···
                               1!7 2              2!7 · 13 2
                                                      2 m             
                                  (−1)m                 x
                     +                                          + ···
                        m!7 · 13 · · · (6m + 1) 2
                             2                      2      2                                      2    m
                         1     x              1        x                         (−1)m               x
    (d) y2 (x) = 1 −                  +                        + ··· +                                      + ···
                        1!5     2         2!5 · 11      2                 m!5 · 11 · · · (6m − 1)     2
    Hint: Let n = 2m in the recurrence relation, m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
                                         an−1                    √             √
 6. (b) r 2 − 2 = 0; an = −                         ; r1 = 2, r2 = − 2
                                   (n + r)2 − 2
                   √
                       
                                     x                           x2
    (c) y1 (x) = x 2 1 −                 √ +                   √            √ + ···
                              1(1 + 2 2) 2!(1 + 2 2)(2 + 2 2)
                                                                                   
                                             (−1)n
                     +             √             √                  √ xn + · · ·
                        n!(1 + 2 2)(2 + 2 2) · · · (n + 2 2)
                     √
                         
                                        x                          x2
    (d) y2 (x) = x− 2 1 −                  √ +                   √            √ + ···
                                1(1 − 2 2) 2!(1 − 2 2)(2 − 2 2)
                                                                                     
                                               (−1)n
                       +             √            √                   √ xn + · · ·
                         n!(1 − 2 2)(2 − 2 2) · · · (n − 2 2)
 7. (b) r 2 = 0;      (n + r)an = an−1 ; r1 = r2 = 0
                             x2      x3             xn
    (c) y1 (x) = 1 + x +         +       + ··· +         + · · · = ex
                             2!      3!             n!
 8. (b) 2r 2 + r − 1 = 0; (2n + 2r − 1)(n + r + 1)an + 2an−2 = 0;
    r1 = 21 , r2 = −1
                       
                               x2          x4                        (−1)m x2m
    (c) y1 (x) = x1/2 1 −          +             − ··· +                                  + ···
                                7      2!7 · 11               m!7 · 11 · · · (4m + 3)
                       
                                       x4                     (−1)m x2m
    (d) y2 (x) = x−1 1 − x2 +               − ··· +                              + ···
                                      2!5              m!5 · 9 · · · (4m − 3)
 9. (b) r 2 − 4r + 3= 0;       (n + r − 3)(n + r − 1)an − (n + r − 2)an−1 = 0; r1 = 3, r2 = 1
                             2       x2                  2xn
    (c) y1 (x) = x 3
                       1+ x+              + ··· +                  + ···
                             3        4             n!(n + 2)
10. (b) r 2 − r + 41 = 0; (n + r − 21 )2 an + an−2 = 0; r1 = r2 = 1/2
                       
                               x2        x4               (−1)m x2m
    (c) y1 (x) = x1/2 1 − 2 + 2 2 − · · · + 2m                          + ···
                               2       24                  2 (m!)2
11. (a) r 2 = 0;    r1 = 0, r2 = 0
                        α(α + 1)                 α(α + 1)[1 · 2 − α(α + 1)]
    (b) y1 (x) = 1 +                (x − 1) −                                       (x − 1)2 + · · ·
                          2 · 12                           (2 · 12 )(2 · 22 )
                α(α + 1)[1 · 2 − α(α + 1)] · · · [n(n − 1) − α(α + 1)]
    +(−1)n+1                                                                      (x − 1)n
                                            2n (n!)2
    +···
12. (a) r1 = 21 , r2 = 0 at both x = ±1
    (b) y1 (x) = |x − 1|1/2                                                                             
              ∞
                  (−1)n (1 + 2α) · · · (2n − 1 + 2α)(1 − 2α) · · · (2n − 1 − 2α)
    × 1+                                                                                      (x − 1) n
              n=1
                                                2n (2n + 1)!
    y2 (x) = 1
          ∞
               (−1)n α(1 + α) · · · (n − 1 + α)(−α)(1 − α) · · · (n − 1 − α)
        +                                                                                 (x − 1)n
          n=1
                                     n!1 · 3 · 5 · · · (2n − 1)
                                                      (n − 1 − λ)an−1
13. (b) r 2 = 0;    r1 = 0,      r2 = 0;      an =
                                                               n2
                        −λ          (−λ)(1 − λ) 2                 (−λ)(1 − λ) · · · (n − 1 − λ) n
    (c) y1 (x) = 1 +          x+                   x + ··· +                                      x
                       (1!) 2           (2!) 2                                  (n!)2
                   + ···
    For λ = n, the coefficients of all terms past xn are zero.
16. (e) [(n − 1)2 − 1]bn = −bn−2 , and it is impossible to determine b2 .
Section 5.6, page 294
 1. (a) x = 0;        (b) r(r − 1) = 0; r1 = 1, r2 = 0
 2. (a) x = 0;        (b) r 2 − 3r + 2 = 0; r1 = 2, r2 = 1
 3. (a) x = 0;        (b) r(r − 1) = 0; r1 = 1, r2 = 0
    (a) x = 1;        (b) r(r + 5) = 0; r1 = 0, r2 = −5
 4. None                                                          √                           √
 5. (a) x = 0;       (b) r 2 + 2r − 2 = 0; r1 = −1 + 3 ∼              = 0.732, r2 = −1 − 3 ∼       = −2.73
 6. (a) x = 0;        (b) r(r − 34 ) = 0; r1 = 34 , r2 = 0
    (a) x = −2;         (b) r(r − 45 ) = 0; r1 = 45 , r2 = 0
 7. (a) x = 0;        (b) r 2 + 1 = 0; r1 = i, r2 = −i √                                          √
 8. (a) x = −1;        (b) r 2 − 7r + 3 = 0; r1 = (7 + 37)/2 ∼              = 6.54, r2 = (7 − 37)/2 ∼        = 0.459
 9. (a) x = 1;        (b) r 2 + r = 0; r1 = 0, r2 = −1
10. (a) x = −2;         (b) r 2 − (5/4)r = 0; r1 = 5/4, r2 = 0
11. (a) x = 2;        (b) r 2 − 2r = 0; r1 = 2, r2 = 0
    (a) x = −2;         (b) r 2 − 2r = 0; r1 = 2, r2 = 0
12. (a) x = 0;        (b) r 2 − (5/3)r = 0; r1 = 5/3, r2 = √           0
    (a) x = −3; √       (b) r 2 − (r/3) − 1 = 0; r1 = (1 + 37)/6 ∼               = 1.18,
    r2 = (1 − 37)/6 ∼    = −0.847
13. (b) r1 = 0, r2 = 0
    (c) y1 (x) = 1 + x + 14 x2 + 361 x3 + · · · , y2 (x) = y1 (x) ln x − 2x − 34 x2 − 108     x + ···
                                                                                            11 3
14. (b) r1 = 1, r2 = 0
    (c) y1 (x) = x − 4x2 + 17    3
                                   x3 − 12  x + · · · , y2 (x) = −6y1 (x) ln x + 1 − 33x2 + 449
                                         47 4
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                     x3 + · · ·
15. (b) r1 = 1, r2 = 0
    (c) y1 (x) = x + 23 x2 + 94 x3 + 51 16
                                           x4 + · · · , y2 (x) = 3y1 (x) ln x + 1 − 21 4
                                                                                         x2 − 19
                                                                                               4
                                                                                                  x3 + · · ·
16. (b) r1 = 1, r2 = 0
    (c) y1 (x) = x − 21 x2 + 121 x3 − 144    x + ···
                                           1 4
        y2 (x) = −y1 (x) ln x + 1 − 34 x2 + 367 x3 − 1728      x + ···
                                                            35 4
17. (b) r1 = 1, r2 = −1
    (c) y1 (x) = x − 241 3
                          x + 720    x + · · · , y2 (x) = − 13 y1 (x) ln x + x−1 − 901 x3 + · · ·
                                   1 5
18. (b) r1 = 2 , r2 = 0
               1
    (c) y1 (x) = (x − 1)1/2 [1 − 34 (x − 1) + 480   53
                                                        (x − 1)2 + · · ·], (d) ρ = 1
19. (c) Hint: (n − 1)(n − 2) + (1 + α + β)(n − 1) + αβ = (n − 1 + α)(n − 1 + β)
    (d) Hint: (n − γ)(n − 1 − γ) + (1 + α + β)(n − γ) + αβ = (n − γ + α)(n − γ + β)
Section 5.7, page 305
                                                                                                    
              ∞
                   (−1)n xn                                     1        ∞
                                                                             Hn + Hn−1
 1. y1 (x) =                   , y2 (x) = −y1 (x) ln x +            1−                    (−1)n xn
              n=0
                  n!(n +   1)!                                  x        n=1
                                                                               n!(n − 1)!
              1  (−1)n xn                                    2  (−1)n Hn n
                 ∞                                                ∞
 2. y1 (x) =                    ,   y2 (x) = y1 (x) ln x −                       x
              x n=0 (n!)2                                     x n=1 (n!)2
              ∞
                  (−1)n 2n                                      ∞
                                                                     (−1)n 2n Hn
 3. y1 (x) =                xn ,    y2 (x) = y1 (x) ln x − 2                       xn
              n=0
                    (n!)2                                       n=1
                                                                         (n!)2
                                                                                                                             
                               1  (−1)n                                                            
                                  ∞                                                                   ∞
                                                                                        1                Hn + Hn−1
                 4. y1 (x) =                          xn , y2 (x) = −y1 (x) ln x + 2 1 −                            (−1)n xn
                               x n=0 n!(n + 1)!                                         x                n!(n − 1)!
                                                                                                   n=1
                                              ∞
                                                               (−1)m                     x 2m
                 5. y1 (x) = x  3/2
                                       1+
                                             m=1
                                                   m!(1 + 23 )(2 + 23 ) · · · (m + 23 ) 2
                                                                                                  
                                               ∞
                                                                 (−1)m                    x 2m
                                −3/2
                    y2 (x) = x           1+
                                               m=1
                                                    m!(1 − 23 )(2 − 23 ) · · · (m − 23 ) 2
                    Hint: Let n = 2m in the recurrence relation, m = 1, 2, 3, . . . .
                    For r = − 23 , a1 = 0 and a3 is arbitrary.
C H A P T E R 6 Section 6.1, page 315
                 1. Piecewise continuous                                       2. Neither
                 3. Continuous                                                 4. Piecewise continuous
                 5. (a) F(s) = 1/s2 , s > 0                (b) F(s) = 2/s3 , s > 0                 (c) F(s) = n!/sn+1 , s > 0
                 6. F(s) = s/(s + a ), s > 0
                                   2       2
                                  s
                 7. F(s) = 2             , s > |b|
                              s − b2
                                  b                                                               s−a
                 8. F(s) = 2             , s > |b|                             9. F(s) =                     , s − a > |b|
                              s − b2                                                        (s − a)2 − b2
                                      b                                                         b
                10. F(s) =                        , s − a > |b|               11. F(s) = 2             , s>0
                              (s − a)2 − b2                                                 s + b2
                                  s                                                                  b
                12. F(s) = 2             , s>0                                13. F(s) =                     , s>a
                              s + b2                                                        (s − a)2 + b2
                                    s−a                                                          1
                14. F(s) =                        , s>a                       15. F(s) =                , s>a
                              (s − a)2 + b2                                                 (s − a)2
                                  2as                                                             s + a2
                                                                                                    2
                16. F(s) = 2                 ,    s > 0                       17. F(s)  =                      , s > |a|
                              (s + a2 )2                                                    (s − a)2 (s + a)2
                                    n!                                                      2a(3s − a )
                                                                                                    2     2
                18. F(s) =                   , s>a                            19. F(s) =                    , s>0
                              (s − a)n+1                                                      (s2 + a2 )3
                              2a(3s2 + a2 )                                                  1 − e−πs
                20. F(s) =                       , s > |a|                    21. F(s) =
                                (s − a )
                                  2       2  3                                                    s
                              1 − (s + 1)e−s                                                 1 − e−s
                22. F(s) =                                                    23. F(s) =
                                       s2                                                        s2
                              1 − 2e−s + e−2s
                24. F(s) =                                                    25. Converges
                                        s2
                26. Converges                                                 27. Diverges
                28. Converges
                                       √                              √
                30. (d) (3/2) = π/2; (11/2) = 945 π/32
                Section 6.2, page 324
                 1. f (t) = 23 sin 2t                                          2. f (t) = 2t 2 et
                 3. f (t) = 25 et − 25 e−4t                                    4. f (t) = 95 e3t + 65 e−2t
                 5. f (t) = 2e−t cos 2t                                        6. f (t) = 2 cosh 2t − 23 sinh 2t
                 7. f (t) = 2et cos t + 3et sin t                              8. f (t) = 3 − 2 sin 2t + 5 cos 2t
                 9. f (t) = −2e−2t cos t + 5e−2t sin t                        10. f (t) = 2e−t cos 3t − 53 e−t sin 3t
                11. y = 15 (e3t + 4e−2t )                                     12. y = 2e−t − e−2t
                13. y = et sin t √                 √         √                14. y = e2t − te2t
                15. y = 2et cos 3 t − (2/ 3)et sin 3 t                        16. y = 2e−t cos 2t + 21 e−t sin 2t
                17. y = tet − t 2 et + 23 t 3 et                              18. y = cosh t
                              √
                19. y = cos 2 t                                               20. y = (ω2 − 4)−1 [(ω2 − 5) cos ωt + cos 2t]
21. y = 15 (cos t − 2 sin t + 4et cos t − 2et sin t) 22. y = 15 (e−t − et cos t + 7et sin t)
                                                                           s        1 − e−πs
23. y = 2e−t + te−t + 2t 2 e−t                           24. Y(s) = 2            +
                                                                       s + 4 s(s2 + 4)
                     1         e−s (s + 1)                               1 − e−s
25. Y(s) = 2 2                − 2 2                      26. Y(s) = 2 2
               s (s + 1)        s (s + 1)                              s (s + 4)
               1 − 2e−s + e−2s
27. Y(s) =
                   s2 (s2 + 1)
30. F(s) = 1/(s − a)2                                    31. F(s) = 2b(3s2 − b2 )/(s2 + b2 )3
32. F(s) = n!/s     n+1
                                                         33. F(s) = n!/(s − a)n+1
34. F(s) = 2b(s − a)/[(s − a) + b ]  2     2 2
                                                         35. F(s) = [(s − a)2 − b2 ]/[(s − a)2 + b2 ]2
37. (a) Y  + s2 Y = s            (b) s2 Y  + 2sY  − [s2 + α(α + 1)]Y = −1
Section 6.3, page 333
 7. (b) f (t) = −2u3 (t) + 4u5 (t) − u7 (t)
 8. (b) f (t) = 1 − 2u1 (t) + 2u2 (t) − 2u3 (t) + u4 (t)
 9. (b) f (t) = 1 + u2 (t)[e−(t−2) − 1]
10. (b) f (t) = t 2 + u2 (t)(1 − t 2 )
11. (b) f (t) = t − u1 (t) − u2 (t) − u3 (t)(t − 2)
12. (b) f (t) = t + u2 (t)(2 − t) + u5 (t)(5 − t) − u7 (t)(7 − t)
13. F(s) = 2e−s /s3
14. F(s) = e−s (s2 + 2)/s3
               e−πs      e−2πs                                         1
15. F(s) = 2 − 2 (1 + πs)                                16. F(s) = (e−s + 2e−3s − 6e−4s )
                 s         s                                           s
17. F(s) = s−2 [(1 − s)e−2s − (1 + s)e−3s ]              18. F(s) = (1 − e−s )/s2
19. f (t) = t 3 e2t                                      20. f (t) = 13 u2 (t)[et−2 − e−2(t−2) ]
21. f (t) = 2u2 (t)e cos(t − 2)
                       t−2
                                                         22. f (t) = u2 (t) sinh 2(t − 2)
23. f (t) = u1 (t)e2(t−1) cosh(t − 1)                    24. f (t) = u1 (t) + u2 (t) − u3 (t) − u4 (t)
26. f (t) = 2(2t)n                                       27. f (t) = 21 e−t/2 cos t
28. f (t) = 16 et/3 (e2t/3 − 1)                          29. f (t) = 21 et/2 u2 (t/2)
                −1         −s
30. F(s) = s (1 − e ), s > 0                             31. F(s) = s−1 (1 − e−s + e−2s − e−3s ), s > 0
               1                                            1 − e−(2n+2)s
32. F(s) = [1 − e−s + · · · + e−2ns − e−(2n+1)s ] =                        , s>0
               s                                             s(1 + e−s )
               1
                   ∞
                                         1/s
33. F(s) =            (−1)n e−ns =             , s>0
               s n=0                   1 + e−s
                     1/s                                                     1 − e−s
35. L{f (t)} =               ,  s  >  0                  36.  L{f (t)} =                , s>0
                   1 + e−s                                                 s(1 + e−s )
                                 −s                                                    −πs
                   1 − (1 + s)e                                                   1+e
37. L{f (t)} = 2                    , s>0                38. L{f (t)} =                          , s>0
                     s (1 − e−s )                                          (1 + s2 )(1 − e−πs )
                         −1        −s                                   −2         −s
39. (a) L{f (t)} = s (1 − e ), s > 0                  (b) L{g(t)} = s (1 − e ), s > 0
    (c) L{h(t)} = s−2 (1 − e−s )2 , s > 0
                           1 − e−s
40. (b) L{p(t)} = 2                    , s>0
                         s (1 + e−s )
Section 6.4, page 340
 1. (a) y = 1 − cos t + sin t − u3π (t)(1 + cos t)
 2. (a) y = e−t sin t + 21 uπ (t)[1 + e−(t−π) cos t + e−(t−π) sin t]
    − 21 u2π (t)[1 − e−(t−2π) cos t − e−(t−2π) sin t]
 3. (a) y = 16 [1 − u2π (t)](2 sin t − sin 2t)
 4. (a) y = 16 (2 sin t − sin 2t) − 16 uπ (t)(2 sin t + sin 2t)
 5. (a) y = 21 + 21 e−2t − e−t − u10 (t)[ 21 + 21 e−2(t−10) − e−(t−10) ]
 6. (a) y = e−t − e−2t + u2 (t)[ 21 − e−(t−2) + 21 e−2(t−2) ]
 7. (a) y = cos t + u3π (t)[1 − cos(t − 3π)]
 8. (a) y = h(t) − uπ/2 (t)h(t − π/2), h(t) = 25        4
                                                          (−4 + 5t + 4e−t/2 cos t − 3e−t/2 sin t)
 9. (a) y = 2 sin t + 2 t − 2 u6 (t)[t − 6 − sin(t − 6)]
              1           1      1
10. (a) y = h(t) + uπ (t)h(t − π), h(t) = 17        4
                                                      [−4 cos t + sin t + 4e−t/2 cos t + e−t/2 sin t]
11. (a) y = uπ (t)[ 41 − 14 cos(2t − 2π)] − u3π (t)[ 14 − 41 cos(2t − 6π)]
12. (a) y = u1 (t)h(t − 1) − u2 (t)h(t − 2), h(t) = −1 + (cos t + cosh t)/2
13. (a) y = h(t) − uπ (t)h(t − π), h(t) = (3 − 4 cos t + cos 2t)/12
14. f (t) = [ut0 (t)(t − t0 ) − ut0 +k (t)(t − t0 − k)](h/k)
15. g(t) = [ut0 (t)(t − t0 ) − 2ut0 +k (t)(t − t0 − k) + ut0 +2k (t)(t − t0 − 2k)](h/k)
16. (b) u(t) = 4ku3/2 (t)h(t − 23 ) − 4ku5/2 (t)h(t − 25 ),
                       √                      √                        √
         h(t) = 14 − ( 7/84) e−t/8 sin(3 7 t/8) − 14 e−t/8 cos(3 7 t/8)
    (d) k = 2.51           (e) τ = 25.6773
17. (a) k = 5         (b) y = [u5 (t)h(t − 5) − u5+k (t)h(t − 5 − k)]/k, h(t) = 14 t − 18 sin 2t
18. (b) fk (t) = [u4−k (t) − u4+k (t)]/2k;
         y = [u4−k (t)h(t − 4 + k) − u4+k (t)h(t − 4 − k)]/2k,
                                    √               √                      √
         h(t) = 14 − 41 e−t/6 cos( 143 t/6) − ( 143/572) e−t/6 sin( 143 t/6)
                                n
19. (b) y = 1 − cos t + 2 (−1)k ukπ (t)[1 − cos(t − kπ)]
                                k=1
                              n
21. (b) y = 1 − cos t +           (−1)k ukπ (t)[1 − cos(t − kπ)]
                             k=1
                                n
23. (a) y = 1 − cos t + 2          (−1)k u11k/4 (t)[1 − cos(t − 11k/4)]
                               k=1
Section 6.5, page 348
 1. (a) y = e−t cos t + e−t sin t + uπ (t)e−(t−π) sin(t − π)
 2. (a) y = 21 uπ (t) sin 2(t − π) − 21 u2π (t) sin 2(t − 2π)
 3. (a) y = − 21 e−2t + 21 e−t + u5 (t)[−e−2(t−5) + e−(t−5) ] + u10 (t)[ 21 + 21 e−2(t−10) − e−(t−10) ]
 4. (a) y = cosh(t) − 20u3 (t) sinh(t − 3)      √          √                        √
 5. (a) y = 14 sin t − 14 cos t + 14 e−t cos 2 t + (1/ 2) u3π (t)e−(t−3π) sin 2(t − 3π)
 6. (a) y = 21 cos 2t + 21 u4π (t) sin 2(t − 4π)
 7. (a) y = sin t + u2π (t) sin(t − 2π)
 8. (a) y = uπ/4 (t) sin 2(t − π/4)
 9. (a) y = uπ/2 (t)[1 − cos(t − π/2)] + 3u3π/2 (t) sin(t − 3π/2) − u2π (t)[1 − cos(t − 2π)]
                   √                                       √
10. (a) y = (1/ 31) uπ/6 (t) exp[− 14 (t − π/6)] sin( 31/4)(t − π/6)
11. (a) y = 15 cos t + 25 sin t − 15 e−t cos t − 35 e−t sin t + uπ/2 (t)e−(t−π/2) sin(t − π/2)
12. (a) y = u1 (t)[sinh(t − 1) − sin(t − 1)]/2  √
13. (a) −e−T/4 δ(t √ − 5 − T), T = 8π/         √ 15
14. (a) y = (4/√ 15) u1 (t)e−(t−1)/4 sin( 15/4)(t√       − 1)      (b) t1 ∼ = 2.3613, y1 ∼   = 0.71153
    (c) y = (8 7/21) u1 (t)e−(t−1)/8 sin(3 7/8) (t − 1); t1 ∼          =  2.4569,    y1 ∼
                                                                                        = 0.83351
    (d) t1 = 1 + π/2 ∼    = 2.5708, y1 = 1
15. (a) k1 ∼ = 2.8108          (b) k1 ∼ = 2.3995        (c) k1 = 2
16. (a) φ(t, k) = [u4−k (t)h(t − 4 + k) − u4+k (t)h(t − 4 − k)]/2k, h(t) = 1 − cos t
    (b) φ0 (t) = u4 (t) sin(t − 4)           (c) Yes
               
               20
17. (b) y =        ukπ (t) sin(t − kπ)
              k=1
               
               20
18. (b) y =        (−1)k+1 ukπ (t) sin(t − kπ)
              k=1
               
               20                                                      20
19. (b) y =        ukπ/2 (t) sin(t − kπ/2)              20. (b) y =        (−1)k+1 ukπ/2 (t) sin(t − kπ/2)
              k=1                                                      k=1
                                 15                                                              
                                                                                                  40
                21. (b) y =            u(2k−1)π (t) sin[t − (2k − 1)π]          22. (b) y =           (−1)k+1 u11k/4 (t) sin(t − 11k/4)
                                k=1                                                              k=1
                                          
                                          20                                     √
                23. (b) y = √20     399
                                             (−1)k+1 ukπ (t)e−(t−kπ)/20 sin[ 399(t − kπ)/20]
                                         k=1
                                          
                                          15                                      √
                24. (b)   y = √20   399
                                              u(2k−1)π (t)e−[t−(2k−1)π]/20 sin{ 399[t − (2k − 1)π]/20}
                                         k=1
                Section 6.6, page 354
                 3. sin t ∗ sin t = 21 (sin t − t cos t) is negative when t = 2π, for example.
                 4. F(s) = 2/s2 (s2 + 4)
                 5. F(s) = 1/(s + 1)(s2 + 1)
                 6. F(s) = 1/s   (s − 1)
                                     2
                                                                                  7. F(s) =s/(s2 + 1)2
                                     t                                                            t
                 8. f (t) = 16         (t − τ)3 sin τ dτ                          9. f (t) =        e−(t−τ) cos 2τ dτ
                                0 t                                                           0 t
                10. f (t) = 21         (t − τ)e−(t−τ) sin 2τ dτ                 11. f (t) =         sin(t − τ)g(τ) dτ
                           1      0                                                            0
                                                         (m + 1) (n + 1)
                12. (c)       um (1 − u)n du =
                           0                              (m + n + 2)                      t
                           1                 1 t
                13. y = sin ωt +                    sin ω(t − τ)g(τ) dτ 14. y =                 e−(t−τ) sin(t − τ) sin ατ dτ
                          ω                 ω 0                                             0
                                t
                15. y = 18        e−(t−τ)/2 sin 2(t − τ)g(τ) dτ
                              0                                t
                16. y = e−t/2 cos t − 21 e−t/2 sin t +             e−(t−τ)/2 sin(t − τ)[1 − uπ (τ)] dτ
                                                   t           0
                17. y = 2e−2t + te−2t + (t − τ)e−2(t−τ) g(τ) dτ
                                                t0
                18. y = 2e − e + [e−(t−τ) − e−2(t−τ) ] cos ατ dτ
                             −t         −2t
                                                0
                          1 t
                19. y =           [sinh(t − τ) − sin(t − τ)]g(τ) dτ
                          2 0                             t
                20. y = 43 cos t − 13 cos 2t + 16            [2 sin(t − τ) − sin 2(t − τ)]g(τ) dτ
                                                          0
                                   F(s)
                21. (s) =                                                      22. (a) φ(t) = 13 (4 sin 2t − 2 sin t)
                               1 + K(s)
                23. (a) φ(t) = cos t               (b) φ (t) + φ(t) = 0,           φ(0) = 1,           φ (0) = 0
                24. (a) φ(t) = cosh(t)                 (b) φ (t) − φ(t) = 0,           φ(0) = 1,           φ (0) = 0
                                                     2 −t
                25. (a) φ(t) = (1 − 2t + t )e
                    (b) φ (t) + 2φ (t) + φ(t) = 2e       √ ,
                                                               −t
                                                                        φ(0) = 1, √ φ (0) = −3
                                       1 −t
                26. (a) φ(t) = 3 e − 3 e cos( 3t/2) + √13 et/2 sin( 3t/2)
                                                 1 t/2
                    (b) φ (t) + φ(t) = 0,              φ(0) = 0,          φ (0) = 0,          φ (0) = 1
                27. (a) φ(t) = cos t
                    (b) φ(4) (t) − φ(t) = 0,              √φ(0) = 1,          φ (0) = 0,          φ (0) = −1,         φ (0) = 0
                                                 −t/2
                28. (a) φ(t) = 1 − √3 e      2
                                                      sin( 3t/2)
                    (b) φ (t) + φ (t) + φ (t) = 0,             φ(0) = 1,           φ (0) = −1,           φ (0) = 1
C H A P T E R 7 Section 7.1, page 363
                 1. x1 = x2 ,       x2 = −2x1 − 0.5x2                           2. x1 = x2 , x2 = −2x1 − 0.5x2 + 3 sin t
                 3. x1 = x2 ,       x2 = −(1 − 0.25t −2 )x1 − t −1 x2           4. x1 = x2 , x2 = x3 , x3 = x4 , x4 = x1
                 5. x1 = x2 ,       x2 = −4x1 − 0.25x2 + 2 cos 3t,             x1 (0) = 1, x2 (0) = −2
 6. x1 = x2 , x2 = −q(t)x1 − p(t)x2 + g(t); x1 (0) = u0 , x2 (0) = u0
 7. (a) x1 = c1 e−t + c2 e−3t , x2 = c1 e−t − c2 e−3t
    (b) c1 = 5/2, c2 = −1/2 in solution in (a)
    (c) Graph approaches origin in the first quadrant tangent to the line x1 = x2 .
 8. (a) x1 − x1 − 2x1 = 0          (b) x1 = 11 3
                                                    e2t − 23 e−t , x2 = 11 6
                                                                             e2t − 43 e−t
    (c) Graph is asymptotic to the line x1 = 2x2 in the first quadrant.
 9. (a) 2x1 − 5x1 + 2x1 = 0          (b) x1 = − 23 et/2 − 21 e2t , x2 = 23 et/2 − 21 e2t
    (c) Graph is asymptotic to the line x1 = x2 in the third quadrant.
10. (a) x1 + 3x1 + 2x1 = 0          (b) x1 = −7e−t + 6e−2t , x2 = −7e−t + 9e−2t
    (c) Graph approaches the origin in the third quadrant tangent to the line x1 = x2 .
11. (a) x1 + 4x1 = 0         (b) x1 = 3 cos 2t + 4 sin 2t, x2 = −3 sin 2t + 4 cos 2t
    (c) Graph is a circle, center at origin, radius 5, traversed clockwise.
12. (a) x1 + x1 + 4.25x1 = 0
    (b) x1 = −2e−t/2 cos 2t + 2e−t/2 sin 2t, x2 = 2e−t/2 cos 2t + 2e−t/2 sin 2t
    (c) Graph is a clockwise spiral, approaching the origin.
13. LRCI  + LI  + RI = 0
18. y1 = y3 , y2 = y4 , m1 y3 = −(k1 + k2 )y1 + k2 y2 + F1 (t),
    m2 y4 = k2 y1 − (k2 + k3 )y2 + F2 (t)
22. (a) Q1 = 23 − 101 Q1 + 403 Q2 , Q1 (0) = 25, Q2 = 3 + 101 Q1 − 15 Q2 , Q2 (0) = 15
    (b) QE1 = 42, QE2 = 36
    (c) x1 = − 101 x1 + 403 x2 , x1 (0) = −17, x2 = 101 x1 − 15 x2 , x2 (0) = −21
23. (a) Q1 = 3q1 − 15   1
                           Q1 + 100 1
                                       Q2 , Q1 (0) = Q01
       
    Q2 = q2 + 30 Q1 − 100 Q2 , Q2 (0) = Q02
                   1        3
    (b) QE1 = 6(9q1 + q2 ), QE2 = 20(3q1 + 2q2 )                   (c) No        (d) 109 ≤ QE2 /QE1 ≤ 203
Section 7.2, page 376
          ⎛                        ⎞         ⎛                               ⎞
            6        −6          3             −15             6       −12
 1. (a) ⎝5            9       −2⎠ (b) ⎝ 7                  −18           −1⎠
            2         3          8             −26           −3          −5
          ⎛                       ⎞          ⎛                         ⎞
            6       −12         3              −8        −9          11
    (c) ⎝4             3        7⎠ (d) ⎝ 14               12        −5⎠
            9         12        0                5       −8           5
                                              
              1−i          −7 + 2i                  3 + 4i          6i
 2. (a)                                    (b)
            −1 + 2i          2 + 3i              11 + 6i          6 − 5i
                                              
            −3 + 5i        7 + 5i                8 + 7i         4 − 4i
    (c)                                   (d)
              2+i          7 + 2i                6 − 4i            −4
          ⎛                          ⎞          ⎛                        ⎞
            −2          1          2              1          3       −2
 3. (a) ⎝ 1             0        −1⎠ (b) ⎝2                −1          1⎠
              2       −3           1              3        −1          0
              ⎛                            ⎞
                −1           4           0
    (c), (d) ⎝ 3           −1            0⎠
                   5       −4            1
                                                                                
            3 − 2i         2−i                  3 + 2i            1−i               3 + 2i       2+i
 4. (a)                                  (b)                                 (c)
            1+i          −2 + 3i                2+i            −2 − 3i              1−i         −2 − 3i
    ⎛                          ⎞
       10          6       −4
 5. ⎝ 0            4       10⎠
         4         4         6
           ⎛                                ⎞          ⎛                            ⎞
              7            −11           −3                 5         0        −1
 6. (a) ⎝ 11                  20         17⎠       (b) ⎝ 2            7           4⎠
             −4                3       −12                −1          1           4
          ⎛                               ⎞
              6            −8        −11
    (c) ⎝ 9                 15           6⎠
             −5            −1            5
 8. (a) 4i          (b) 12 − 8i            (c) 2 + 2i         (d) 16
                       
       3
      11
                  − 114
10.    2              1
      11             11
                       
          1          1
          6         12
11.
      − 21            1
                      4
    ⎛                               ⎞                              ⎛    1           1
                                                                                                  ⎞
         1         −3             2                                     3           3
                                                                                               0
                                                                   ⎜ 1                          1⎟
12. ⎝−3                3         −1⎠                          13.  ⎝ 3          − 13            3⎠
         2         −1             0                                  − 13           0           1
                                                                                                3
                                                                   ⎛1                         ⎞
                                                                     2
                                                                               − 14         1
                                                                                            8
                                                                   ⎜                        1⎟
14. Singular                                                  15. ⎝ 0            1
                                                                                 2
                                                                                          −4⎠
                                                                                            1
                                                                     0           0
    ⎛      1              3           1
                                        ⎞                                                   2
          10             10          10
    ⎜ 2                              2 ⎟
    ⎝− 10                         − 10 ⎠
                          4
16.                      10
                                                              17. Singular
      − 107          − 101            3
    ⎛
                                     10
                                       ⎞                           ⎛                                       ⎞
                                                                          6         13
                                                                                           − 85          2
         1        1         0      1                                                5                    5
                                                                   ⎜                                       ⎟
    ⎜ 1                            1 ⎟                                                     − 65
                                                                                    11                   4
                  0         1          ⎟                           ⎜      5                                ⎟
18. ⎜                                                         19. ⎜                 5                    5
                                                                                                           ⎟
    ⎝ 1           1         1      1 ⎠                             ⎝      0       − 15         1         1 ⎠
                                                                                               5         5
         0        1         0      1
                                                                       −2         − 45         4
                                                                                                     − 15
           ⎛                                   ⎞                                               5
             7et            5e−t        10e2t
                                            2t ⎠
21. (a) ⎝−et                7e−t         2e
             8e t
                            0           −e2t
           ⎛                                                                                  ⎞
              2e2t − 2 + 3e3t                  1 + 4e−2t − et            3e3t + 2et − e4t
    (b) ⎝ 4e2t − 1 − 3e3t                             −2t
                                               2 + 2e + e      t
                                                                         6e + e + e
                                                                            3t       t     4t ⎠
             −2e2t − 3 + 6e3t              −1 + 6e−2t − 2et            −3e3t + 3et − 2e4t
          ⎛ t                                      ⎞                   ⎛                                       ⎞
              e             −2e−t           2e2t                            1           2e−1          1
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                        (e + 1)
          ⎝                                     2t ⎠                   ⎜                                       ⎟
    (c)      2e t
                             −e−t         −2e             (d) (e − 1) ⎝ 2                e−1        − 2 (e + 1)⎠
                                                                                                      1
             −e t
                            −3e−t           4e  2t
                                                                          −1            3e−1         e+1
Section 7.3, page 388
 1. x1 = − 13 , x2 = 73 , x3 = − 13                             2. No solution
 3. x1 = −c, x2 = c + 1, x3 = c, where c is arbitrary
 4. x1 = c, x2 = −c, x3 = −c, where c is arbitrary
 5. x1 = 0, x2 = 0, x3 = 0                                      6. x1 = c1 , x2 = c2 , x3 = c1 + 2c2 + 2
 7. Linearly independent                                        8. x(1) − 5x(2) + 2x(3) = 0
 9. 2x(1) − 3x(2) + 4x(3) − x(4) = 0                          10. Linearly independent
11. x(1) + x(2) − x(4) = 0                                    13. 3x(1) (t) − 6x(2) (t)       (3)
                                                                                        + x (t) = 0            
                                                                                        1                         1
14. Linearly independent                                      16. λ1 = 2, x(1) =           ; λ2 = 4, x(2) =
                                                                                        3                         1
                                                                   
                                  1                                    1
17. λ1 = 1 + 2i, x(1) =                    ;   λ2 = 1 − 2i, x(2) =
                                1−i                                   1+i
                                                           
                              1                               1
18. λ1 = −3, x(1) =                ;     λ2 = −1, x(2) =
                            −1                                1
                                                    
              (1)        1                      (2)     1
19. λ1 = 0, x =              ; λ2 = 2, x =
                         i                             −i
                       √                                
                            3                                 1
                                                              √
20. λ1 = 2, x(1) =               ; λ2 = −2, x(2) =
                           1                               − 3
                                                               
                                3                                 1
21. λ1 = −1/2, x(1) =                 ; λ2 = −3/2, x(2) =
                               10                                 2
                       ⎛ ⎞                                    ⎛ ⎞                          ⎛ ⎞
                            2                                    0                           0
22. λ1 = 1, x(1) = ⎝−3⎠ ; λ2 = 1 + 2i, x(2) = ⎝ 1⎠ ; λ3 = 1 − 2i, x(3) = ⎝1⎠
                            2                                   −i                           i
                       ⎛ ⎞                             ⎛ ⎞                        ⎛ ⎞
                            1                             −2                         0
23. λ1 = 1, x(1) = ⎝ 0⎠ ; λ2 = 2, x(2) = ⎝ 1⎠ ; λ3 = 3, x(3) = ⎝ 1⎠
                         −1                                 0                      −1
                       ⎛ ⎞                             ⎛ ⎞                        ⎛ ⎞
                            2                             2                          1
24. λ1 = 1, x(1) = ⎝−2⎠ ; λ2 = 2, x(2) = ⎝1⎠ ; λ3 = −1, x(3) = ⎝ 2⎠
                         −1                               2                        −2
                         ⎛ ⎞                                ⎛ ⎞                      ⎛ ⎞
                              1                                 1                      2
25. λ1 = −1, x(1) = ⎝−4⎠ ; λ2 = −1, x(2) = ⎝ 0⎠ ; λ3 = 8, x(3) = ⎝1⎠
                              1                                −1                      2
Section 7.4, page 394
                           
 2. (c) W(t) = c exp          [p11 (t) + p22 (t)] dt
 6. (a) W(t) = t 2
    (b) x(1) and x(2) are linearly independent at each point except t = 0; they are linearly
    independent on every interval.
               one coefficient must be discontinuous at t = 0.
    (c) At least
                     0               1
    (d) x =                                 x
                −2t −2            2t −1
 7. (a) W(t) = t(t − 2)e       t
    (b) x(1) and x(2) are linearly independent at each point except t = 0 and t = 2; they are
    linearly independent on every interval.
    (c) There⎛must be at least one⎞discontinuous coefficient at t = 0 and t = 2.
                      0                   1
    (d) x = ⎝ 2 − 2t                 t2 − 2 ⎠ x
                  t 2 − 2t           t 2 − 2t
Section 7.5, page 405
                                                                                    
                    1 −t                2 2t                                 1 −t        2 −2t
 1. (a) x = c1          e + c2               e               2. (a) x = c1      e + c2      e
                    2                   1                                    1           3
                                                                                       
                    1 t              1 −t                                      1 −3t        1 2t
 3. (a) x = c1          e + c2            e                  4. (a) x = c1       e + c2        e
                    1                3                                       −4             1
                                                                                                
                       1 −3t                1 −t                                     1 t/2           1 2t
 5. (a) x = c1               e + c2              e                6. (a) x = c1         e + c2           e
                    −1                      1                                       −1               1
                                                                                           
                    3               1 −2t                                           −2           −3 t
 7. (a) x = c1           + c2           e                         8. (a) x = c1         + c2           e
                    4               2                                                1             1
                                                                                           
              1                1 2t                                           2+i t                1 −it
 9. x = c1        + c2              e                            10. x = c1           e + c2          e
              i              −i                                                −1               −1
            ⎛ ⎞                 ⎛ ⎞                  ⎛ ⎞
              1                       1                   1
11. x = c1 ⎝1⎠ e + c2 ⎝−2⎠ e + c3 ⎝ 0⎠ e−t
                     4t                     t
              1                       1                −1
            ⎛ ⎞                     ⎛ ⎞                   ⎛ ⎞
                1                        1                  2
12. x = c1 ⎝−4⎠ e + c2 ⎝ 0⎠ e + c3 ⎝1⎠ e8t
                        −t                      −t
                1                     −1                    2
            ⎛ ⎞                      ⎛ ⎞                   ⎛ ⎞
                4                         3                     0
13. x = c1 ⎝−5⎠ e−2t + c2 ⎝−4⎠ e−t + c3 ⎝ 1⎠ e2t
              −7                        −2                    −1
            ⎛ ⎞                   ⎛ ⎞                    ⎛ ⎞
                1                      1                    1
14. x = c1 ⎝−4⎠ et + c2 ⎝−1⎠ e−2t + c3 ⎝2⎠ e3t
              −1                     −1                     1
                                                                                        
            3 1 2t 7 1 4t                                                 1 1 −t 1 1 3t
15. x = −            e +                e                        16. x =          e +            e
            2 3               2 1                                         2 1           2 5
         ⎛ ⎞                 ⎛ ⎞                                           ⎛ ⎞             ⎛ ⎞             ⎛ ⎞
             0                  1                                               1              1             2
17. x = ⎝−2⎠ et + 2 ⎝1⎠ e2t                                      18. x = 6 ⎝ 2⎠ et + 3 ⎝−2⎠ e−t − ⎝ 1⎠ e4t
             1                  0                                            −1                1            −8
                                                                                      
              1                1 −1                                           1 2          1 4
20. x = c1        t + c2            t                            21. x = c1       t + c2       t
              1                3                                              3            1
                                                                                        
              3              1 −2                                             1 −1           2 2
22. x = c1        + c2            t                              23. x = c1       t + c2         t
              4              2                                                2              1
29. (a) x1 = x2 ,      x2 = −(c/a)x1 − (b/a)x2
                                              
                55 3 −t/20 29                       1 −t/4
30. (a) x = −                 e        +                 e           (c) T ∼
                                                                           = 74.39
                 8 2                       8 −2
                  √                                  √
                    − 2 (−2+√2)t/2                         2 (−2−√2)t/2                     √
31. (a) x = c1                 e               + c2            e         ; r1,2 = (−2 ± 2)/2; node
                           1                               1
                                                 
                    −1               √                1          √                   √
    (b) x = c1 √ e            (−1+    2)t
                                          + c2 √ e(−1− 2)t ; r1,2 = −1 ± 2; saddle point
                        2                             2
                          √
    (c) r1,2 = −1 ± α; α = 1
                                                                                     2
           I               1 −2t                1 −t                         1       R1         4
32. (a)         = c1           e + c2               e            33. (a)          −        −        >0
           V               3                    1                          CR2       L         CL
Section 7.6, page 417
                                                      
                             cos 2t                              sin 2t
 1. (a) x = c1 et                              + c2 et
                      cos 2t + sin 2t                     − cos 2t + sin 2t
                                                   
                          2 cos 2t                    −2 sin 2t
 2. (a) x = c1 e−t                      + c2 e−t
                            sin 2t                      cos 2t
                                               
                         5 cos t                         5 sin t
 3. (a) x = c1                             + c2
                    2 cos t + sin t                − cos t + 2 sin t
                                                              
                                 5 cos 23 t                              5 sin 23 t
 4. (a) x = c1 et/2                                  + c2 et/2
                         3(cos 2 t + sin 2 t)
                                   3          3
                                                                 3(− cos 23 t + sin 23 t)
                                                        
                               cos t                              sin t
 5. (a) x = c1 e−t                            + c2 e−t
                        2 cos t + sin t                    − cos t + 2 sin t
                                                   
                         −2 cos 3t                        −2 sin 3t
 6. (a) x = c1                                + c2
                    cos 3t + 3 sin 3t                 sin 3t − 3 cos 3t
            ⎛ ⎞                     ⎛        ⎞           ⎛           ⎞
                 2                       0                      0
 7. x = c1 ⎝−3⎠ e + c2 e ⎝cos 2t ⎠ + c3 e ⎝ sin 2t ⎠
                      t          t                     t
                 2                    sin 2t               − cos 2t
            ⎛ ⎞                         ⎛           √        √            ⎞          ⎛       √       √        ⎞
                 2                                − 2 sin √    2t                              2 cos
                                                                                                   √  2t
 8. x = c1 ⎝−2⎠ e−2t + c2 e−t ⎝                                           ⎠ + c3 e−t ⎝                        ⎠
                                                  √ cos √   2t      √                   √      sin
                                                                                               √ 2t √
                 1                        − cos 2 t − 2 sin 2 t                           2 cos 2 t − sin 2 t
             
          −t cos t − 3 sin t
 9. x = e
                cos t − sin t
              
          −2t      cos t − 5 sin t
10. x = e
                −2 cos t − 3 sin t
11. (a) r = − 14 ± i                                          12. (a) r = 15 ± i
13. (a) r = α ± i √ (b) α = 0                                √          √
14. (a) r = (α√± α2 − 20)/2                    (b) α = − 20, 0, 20
15. (a) r = ± 4 −    √ 5α            (b) α = 4/5
16. (a) r = 54 ± 21 √3α              (b) α = 0, 25/12
17. (a) r = −1 ± √       −α            (b) α = −1, 0
18. (a) r = − 21 ± 21 49 − 24α                  (b) α = 2, 49/24
                             √                                                √              √
19. (a) r = 21 α − 2 ± α2 + 8α − 24                      (b) α = −4 − 2 10, −4 + 2 10, 5/2
                      √
20. (a) r = −1  ± 25     √ + 8α             (b) α  = −25/8,   √ −3
             −1 √cos( √       2 ln t)             −1     √ sin( 2√  ln t)
21. x = c1 t                               + c2 t
                    2 sin( 2 ln t)                     − 2 cos( 2 ln t)
                                                    
                     5 cos(ln t)                               5 sin(ln t)
22. x = c1                                    + c2
              2 cos(ln t) + sin(ln t)                  − cos(ln t) + 2 sin(ln t)
23. (a) r = − 14 ± i, − 41
24. (a) r = − 14 ± i, 101
                                                          
           I                      cos(t/2)                       sin(t/2)
25. (b)         = c1 e−t/2                      + c2 e−t/2
           V                     4 sin(t/2)                    −4 cos(t/2)
    (c) Use c1 = 2,         c2 = − 34 in answer to part (b).
    (d) lim I(t) = lim V(t) = 0; no
        t→∞
        
                       t→∞                                  
           I            −t
                                     cos t                            sin t
26. (b)         = c1 e                              + c2 e−t
           V                  − cos t − sin t                   − sin t + cos t
    (c) Use c1 = 2 and c2 = 3 in answer to part (b).
    (d) lim I(t) = lim V(t) = 0; no
        t→∞       t→∞
28. (b) r = ±i k/m                 (d) |r| is the natural frequency.   
                          (1)          3                                      3
29. (c) r1 = −1, ξ =
         2
                                            ; r22 = −4, ξ (2) =
                                      2                                     −4
    (d) x1 = 3c1 cos t + 3c2 sin t + 3c3 cos 2t + 3c4 sin 2t,
        x2 = 2c1 cos t + 2c2 sin t − 4c3 cos 2t − 4c4 sin 2t
    (e) x1 = −3c1 sin t + 3c2 cos t − 6c3 sin 2t + 6c4 cos 2t,
        x2 = −2c1 sin t + 2c2 cos t + 8c3 sin 2t − 8c4 cos 2t
               ⎛                                        ⎞
                     0             0         1       0
               ⎜ 0                 0         0       1 ⎟⎟
30. (a) A = ⎜  ⎝ −4                3         0       0 ⎠
                    9/4       −13/4          0       0
                            ⎛       ⎞                            ⎛       ⎞
                                1                                     1
                            ⎜ 1 ⎟                                ⎜ 1 ⎟
    (b) r1 = i, ξ (1) = ⎜           ⎟                    (2)     ⎜       ⎟
                            ⎝ i ⎠ ; r2 = −i, ξ = ⎝ −i ⎠ ;
                                 i                                  −i
                        ⎛            ⎞                             ⎛             ⎞
                                 4                                          4
                        ⎜ −3 ⎟                                     ⎜ −3 ⎟
    r3 = 25 i, ξ (3) = ⎜             ⎟                       (4)   ⎜             ⎟
                        ⎝ 10i ⎠ ; r4 = − 2 i, ξ = ⎝ −10i ⎠
                                                    5
                            −2i15                                         15
                                                                             i
                                                               ⎛          2
                                                                             5
                                                                                  ⎞       ⎛               ⎞
                 ⎛             ⎞        ⎛           ⎞                4 cos   2
                                                                               t               4 sin 25 t
                        cos t                sin t             ⎜                  ⎟       ⎜               ⎟
                 ⎜ cos t ⎟              ⎜           ⎟          ⎜ −3 cos 5 t ⎟             ⎜ −3 sin 5 t ⎟
    (c) y = c1 ⎜               ⎟ + c2 ⎜ sin t ⎟ + c3 ⎜         ⎜
                                                                             2    ⎟
                                                                                  ⎟  + c
                                                                                          ⎜
                                                                                         4⎜
                                                                                                     2    ⎟
                                                                                                          ⎟
                 ⎝ − sin t ⎠            ⎝ cos t ⎠              ⎜ −10 sin 5 t ⎟            ⎜ 10 cos 5 t ⎟
                                                               ⎝             2    ⎠       ⎝          2    ⎠
                     − sin t                cos t
                                                                    15
                                                                     2
                                                                             5
                                                                        sin 2 t             − 2 cos 2 t
                                                                                              15      5
    (e) c1 = 107 , c2 = 0, c3 = 17 , c4 = 0.                period = 4π.
               ⎛                                   ⎞
                      0         0       1        0
               ⎜ 0              0       0        1 ⎟
                                                   ⎟
31. (a) A = ⎜  ⎝ −2             1       0        0 ⎠
                      1       −2        0        0
                            ⎛       ⎞                            ⎛       ⎞
                                1                                     1
                            ⎜ 1 ⎟                                ⎜ 1 ⎟
    (b) r1 = i, ξ (1) = ⎜           ⎟                    (2)     ⎜       ⎟
                            ⎝ i ⎠ ; r2 = −i, ξ = ⎝ −i ⎠ ;
                                 i                                  −i
                           ⎛            ⎞                                ⎛             ⎞
                                      1                                             1
         √                 ⎜            ⎟              √                 ⎜             ⎟
    r3 = 3i, ξ (3) = ⎜           √−1 ⎟ ; r4 = − 3i, ξ (4) = ⎜ √−1 ⎟
                           ⎝         3i ⎠                                ⎝ − 3i ⎠
                                 √                                               √
                              − 3i                                                 3i
                 ⎛             ⎞        ⎛           ⎞          ⎛              √       ⎞     ⎛             √     ⎞
                        cos t                sin t                      cos   √ t3                    sin √3 t
                 ⎜ cos t ⎟              ⎜ sin t ⎟              ⎜                      ⎟     ⎜                   ⎟
    (c) y = c1 ⎜               ⎟        ⎜           ⎟          ⎜ √− cos √3 t ⎟              ⎜ √− sin √3 t ⎟
                 ⎝ − sin t ⎠ + c2 ⎝ cos t ⎠ + c3 ⎝ − 3 sin 3 t ⎠ + c4 ⎝                            3 cos    3 t ⎠
                                                                    √         √                  √        √
                     − sin t                cos t                      3 sin 3 t               − 3 cos 3 t
    (e) c1 = 1, c2 = 0, c3 = −2, c4 = 0.
Section 7.7, page 427
                                                           
                     − 13 e−t + 43 e2t       2 −t
                                               e − 23 e2t
 1. (b) (t) =                               3
                     − 23 e−t + 23 e2t       4 −t
                                             3
                                               e − 13 e2t
                                                               
                     1 −t/2
                       e      + 21 e−t           e−t/2 − e−t
 2. (b) (t) =       2
                     1 −t/2
                     4
                       e      − 41 e−t       1 −t/2
                                             2
                                               e      + 21 e−t
                                                         
                       e − 21 e−t
                     3 t
                                         − 21 et + 21 e−t
 3. (b) (t) =       2
                       e − 23 e−t
                     3 t
                     2
                                         − 21 et + 23 e−t
                                                                   
                       1 −3t
                         e + 45 e2t              − 15 e−3t + 15 e2t
 4. (b) (t) =         5
                    − 45 e−3t + 45 e2t             4 −3t
                                                   5
                                                      e + 15 e2t
                 
                   cos t + 2 sin t                 −5 sin t
 5. (b) (t) =
                          sin t                cos t − 2 sin t
                 
                     e−t cos 2t           −2e−t sin 2t
 6. (b) (t) =      1 −t
                    2
                      e sin 2t                 e−t cos 2t
                                                              
                    − 21 e2t + 23 e4t            e − 21 e4t
                                               1 2t
 7. (b) (t) =                                 2
                    − 23 e2t + 23 e4t            e − 21 e4t
                                               3 2t
                                               2
                                                                                
                    e−t cos t + 2e−t sin t                      −e−t sin t
 8. (b) (t) =
                           5e−t sin t                   e−t cos t − 2e−t sin t
                 ⎛                                                                                                ⎞
                      −2e−2t + 3e−t                       −e−2t + e−t                      −e−2t + e−t
                 ⎜                                                                                                ⎟
 9. (b) (t) = ⎝ 25 e−2t − 4e−t + 23 e2t                  5 −2t
                                                          4
                                                            e − 43 e−t + 12   13 2t
                                                                                e          5 −2t
                                                                                           4
                                                                                             e − 43 e−t + 121 e2t ⎠
                      7 −2t
                      2
                         e − 2e−t − 23 e2t                7 −2t
                                                          4
                                                                     2 −t
                                                            e − 3 e − 12 e    13 2t        7 −2t
                                                                                           4
                                                                                             e − 23 e−t − 121 e2t
                 ⎛                                                                                       ⎞
                         e + 13 e−2t + 21 e3t
                       1 t
                       6
                                                          − 13 et + 13 e−2t            e − e−2t + 21 e3t
                                                                                     1 t
                                                                                     2
                 ⎜                                                                                    3t ⎟
10. (b) (t) = ⎝ − 23 et − 13 e−2t + e3t                       e − 13 e−2t
                                                             4 t
                                                             3
                                                                                    −2e + e
                                                                                         t    −2t
                                                                                                  +e ⎠
                    − 16 et − 13 e−2t + 21 e3t                 e − 13 e−2t
                                                             1 t
                                                             3
                                                                                 − 21 et + e−2t + 21 e3t
                         
         7 1 t 3 1 −t
11. x =         e −             e
        2 1            2 3
          3 −t                  −2 −t
12. x =       e cos 2t +                e sin 2t
          1                     3/2
                                    
                u0                           v0          sin ωt
17. (c) x =              cos ωt +
                v0                       −ω2 u0             ω
Section 7.8, page 436
                                                        
                  2 t               2                1 t
 1. (c) x = c1         e + c2            tet +           e
                  1                 1                0
                                          
                  1              1             0
 2. (c) x = c1         + c2           t− 1
                  2              2             2
                                                             
                  2 −t                2                 0 −t
 3. (c) x = c1         e + c2              te−t +            e
                  1                   1                 2
                                                                   
                  1 −t/2                1                    0
 4. (c) x = c1         e     + c2            te−t/2 + 2 e−t/2
                  1                     1                    5
           ⎛ ⎞                  ⎛ ⎞                    ⎡⎛ ⎞                 ⎛ ⎞ ⎤
             −3                      0                         0             1
 5. x = c1 ⎝ 4⎠ e + c2 ⎝ 1⎠ e + c3 ⎣⎝ 1⎠ te + ⎝0⎠ e2t ⎦
                      −t                    2t                       2t
               2                  −1                        −1               1
           ⎛ ⎞               ⎛ ⎞                    ⎛ ⎞
             1                    1                      0
 6. x = c1 ⎝1⎠ e2t + c2 ⎝ 0⎠ e−t + c3 ⎝ 1⎠ e−t
             1                 −1                      −1
                                                                                               
               3 + 4t −3t                                                           3 −t          1
 7. (a) x =               e                                      8. (a) x =             e −6          te−t
               2 + 4t                                                            −1               1
                                                                                       
                   3 t/2 3                1                                       1          3
 9. (a) x =            e +                     tet/2             10. (a) x = 2       + 14      t
                 −2              2 −1                                             2         −1
              ⎛        ⎞            ⎛ ⎞                  ⎛ ⎞
                  −1                      0                 0
11. (a) x = ⎝ 2⎠ e + 4 ⎝ 1⎠ te + 3 ⎝0⎠ e2t
                           t                     t
                 −33                   −6                   1
                 ⎛ ⎞                    ⎛ ⎞
                    1                         2
               4 ⎝ ⎠ −t/2 1 ⎝ ⎠ −7t/2
12. (a) x =         1 e         +             5 e
               3                     3
                    1                      −7
                                                    
              2                2                  1
13. x = c1        t + c2             t ln t +         t
              1                1                  0
                                                             
              1 −3                 1 −3                 0
14. x = c1        t + c2                t ln t − 1 t −3
              1                    1                     4
                                                                        
           I                1 −t/2                  1                2 −t/2
16. (b)          =−              e       +              te−t/2 +       e
          V              −2                      −2                  0
17. (d) ξ = −ξ (1)          (e) ξ = −(k1 + k2 )ξ (1) ,            k1 + k2  = 0
                     ⎛      ⎞
                         0
18. (b) x(1) (t) = ⎝ 1⎠ e2t
                       −1
                    ⎛ ⎞                  ⎛ ⎞
                         0                  1
    (c) x (t) = ⎝ 1⎠ te + ⎝1⎠ e2t
         (2)                      2t
                       −1                   0
                     ⎛ ⎞                         ⎛ ⎞             ⎛ ⎞
                         0                          1              2
    (d) x (t) = ⎝ 1⎠ (t /2)e + ⎝1⎠ te + ⎝0⎠ e2t
         (3)                      2       2t               2t
                       −1                           0              3
                       ⎛                                               ⎞
                             0             1                t+2
                       ⎜                                               ⎟
    (e) (t) = e2t ⎜         1          t+1             (t 2 /2) + t ⎟
                       ⎝                                               ⎠
                          −1              −t          −(t 2 /2) + 3
              ⎛                           ⎞                    ⎛                       ⎞
                   0         1          2                        −3          3       2
              ⎜                           ⎟             −1     ⎜                       ⎟
    (f) T = ⎝ 1              1          0⎠ ,         T =⎝ 3               −2        −2⎠ ,
                 −1          0          3                        −1          1       1
         ⎛                       ⎞
           2         1         0
         ⎜                       ⎟
    J = ⎝0           2         1⎠
           0         0         2
                    ⎛ ⎞                               ⎛ ⎞
                       1                                   0
19. (a) x(1) (t) = ⎝0⎠ et ,             x(2) (t) = ⎝ 2⎠ et
                       2                                −3
                     ⎛ ⎞                ⎛ ⎞
                       −2                  0
    (d) x(3) (t) = ⎝−4⎠ tet + ⎝0⎠ et
                         2                 1
                    ⎛                                   ⎞         ⎛                               ⎞
                         1         0          −2t                      1        −2        −2t
    (e) (t) = et ⎝ 0              2          −4t ⎠ or et ⎝ 0                   −4        −4t ⎠
                         2       −3          2t + 1                    2         2       2t + 1
             ⎛                         ⎞                    ⎛                             ⎞
                1        −2          0                           1         −1/2         0
             ⎜                         ⎟                    ⎜                             ⎟
    (f) T = ⎝0           −4          0⎠ ,         T−1 = ⎝ 0                −1/4         0⎠ ,
                2          2         1                        −2             3/2        1
        ⎛                     ⎞
           1       0        0
        ⎜                     ⎟
    J = ⎝0         1        1⎠
           0       0        1
                                                                                                
                 λ2        2λ                       λ3         3λ2                     λ4       4λ3
20. (a) J =
         2
                                 ,        J =
                                           3
                                                                      ,       J =
                                                                                4
                 0         λ2                       0          λ3                     0         λ4
                                          
                      λt
                           1          t
    (c) exp(Jt) = e                                   (d) x = exp(Jt)x0
                           0         1
                         ⎛                       ⎞                                        ⎛                    ⎞
                            1         0        0                                              1       t t 2 /2
                      λt ⎜                       ⎟                                        ⎜                    ⎟
21. (c) exp(Jt) = e ⎝0                1         t⎠            22. (c) exp(Jt) = eλt ⎝ 0               1    t   ⎠
                            0         0        1                                              0       0    1
Section 7.9, page 447
                                                                                 
             1 t             1 −t 3 1                       1 1 t             1         0
 1. x = c1       e + c2          e +                tet −            e +          t−
             1               3            2 1               4 3               2         1
           √                                                         
 2. x = c1
                3 2t
                    e + c2
                                    1
                                    √      e−2t −         √ et + −1
                                                         2/3                 √ e−t
              1                  − 3                    1/ 3              2/ 3
                                                                                     
                  5 cos t                         5 sin t                2                1
 3. x = c1                       + c2                               +        t cos t −       t sin t
             2 cos t + sin t               − cos t + 2 sin t             1                0
           
             1
        −        cos t
             1
                                                               
               1 −3t              1 2t           0 −2t 1 1 t
 4. x = c1          e + c2              e −            e +               e
             −4                   1              1             2 0
                                                                              1
             1              1         1 0                 1              2 −1
 5. x = c1        + c2          t−                −2          ln t +         t − 2 t −2
             2              2         2 1                 2              5            0
                                                                          
             1            −2 −5t             1             8 1             4 −2
 6. x = c1        + c2           e +              ln t +            t+
             2              1                2             5 2           25        1
                                               
             1 3t               1 −t 1                 1 t
 7. x = c1       e + c2              e +                  e
             2                −2              4 −8
                                                       
             1 t             1 −t           1 t             1
 8. x = c1       e + c2          e +             e +2           tet
             1               3              0               1
                                                           17   
                                                     5                      1
             1 −t/2                1 −2t
 9. x = c1       e     + c2              e + 3 t − 152           4
                                                                      + 61 et
             1                  −1
                                                     2           4          2
                                               √                  √                                    √
                                1                − 2 −4t 1               2− √1 te−t +
                                                                                            1        2 + √ 2 −t
                10. x = c1 √ e−t + c2                     e −                                                    e
                                 2                   1            3 2− 2                    9 −1 − 2
                                                                                                     
                                   5 cos t                    5 sin t                 0                    5/2
                11. x = c1                        + c2                         +            t cos t −            t sin t
                               2 cos t + sin t           − cos t + 2 sin t           1/2                    1
                            
                              5/2
                        −            cos t
                                1
                                                                    
                                                                            5 cos t
                12. x = [ 15 ln(sin t) − ln(− cos t) − 25 t + c1 ]
                                                                      2 cos t + sin t
                                                        
                                                              5 sin t
                         + [ 25 ln(sin t) − 45 t + c2 ]
                                                          − cos t + 2 sin t
                                                                                                                      
                                      e−t/2 cos 21 t         e−t/2 sin 21 t                       −t/2
                                                                                                             sin 21 t
                13. (a) (t) =                                                      (b)   x =   e
                                     4e−t/2 sin 21 t      −4e−t/2 cos 21 t                                4 − 4 cos 21 t
                                                                                            
                               1            1 −1         2     1 1              1              1 4 2
                14. x = c1        t + c2        t −         +           t−          t ln t −            t
                               1            3            3     2 3              1              3 3
                                                                                     
                               2 2           1 −1         3        1 −2 4 1 2
                15. x = c1         t + c2        t +         t+                t −
                               1             2            2       10        1          2 3
                18. [3(α1 − α2 ) − 4]/6 = c1 , (α1 + α2 + 3)/2 = c2
C H A P T E R 8 Section 8.1, page 460
                 1. (a) 1.1975, 1.38549, 1.56491, 1.73658
                    (b) 1.19631, 1.38335, 1.56200, 1.73308
                    (c) 1.19297, 1.37730, 1.55378, 1.72316
                    (d) 1.19405, 1.37925, 1.55644, 1.72638
                 2. (a) 1.59980, 1.29288, 1.07242, 0.930175
                    (b) 1.61124, 1.31361, 1.10012, 0.962552
                    (c) 1.64337, 1.37164, 1.17763, 1.05334
                    (d) 1.63301, 1.35295, 1.15267, 1.02407
                 3. (a) 1.2025, 1.41603, 1.64289, 1.88590
                    (b) 1.20388, 1.41936, 1.64896, 1.89572
                    (c) 1.20864, 1.43104, 1.67042, 1.93076
                    (d) 1.20693, 1.42683, 1.66265, 1.91802
                 4. (a) 1.10244, 1.21426, 1.33484, 1.46399
                    (b) 1.10365, 1.21656, 1.33817, 1.46832
                    (c) 1.10720, 1.22333, 1.34797, 1.48110
                    (d) 1.10603, 1.22110, 1.34473, 1.47688
                 5. (a) 0.509239, 0.522187, 0.539023, 0.559936
                    (b) 0.509701, 0.523155, 0.540550, 0.562089
                    (c) 0.511127, 0.526155, 0.545306, 0.568822
                    (d) 0.510645, 0.525138, 0.543690, 0.566529
                 6. (a) −0.920498, −0.857538, −0.808030, −0.770038
                    (b) −0.922575, −0.860923, −0.812300, −0.774965
                    (c) −0.928059, −0.870054, −0.824021, −0.788686
                    (d) −0.926341, −0.867163, −0.820279, −0.784275
                 7. (a) 2.90330, 7.53999, 19.4292, 50.5614
                    (b) 2.93506, 7.70957, 20.1081, 52.9779
                    (c) 3.03951, 8.28137, 22.4562, 61.5496
                    (d) 3.00306, 8.07933, 21.6163, 58.4462
 8. (a) 0.891830, 1.25225, 2.37818, 4.07257
    (b) 0.908902, 1.26872, 2.39336, 4.08799
    (c) 0.958565, 1.31786, 2.43924, 4.13474
    (d) 0.942261, 1.30153, 2.42389, 4.11908
 9. (a) 3.95713, 5.09853, 6.41548, 7.90174
    (b) 3.95965, 5.10371, 6.42343, 7.91255
    (c) 3.96727, 5.11932, 6.44737, 7.94512
    (d) 3.96473, 5.11411, 6.43937, 7.93424
10. (a) 1.60729, 2.46830, 3.72167, 5.45963
    (b) 1.60996, 2.47460, 3.73356, 5.47774
    (c) 1.61792, 2.49356, 3.76940, 5.53223
    (d) 1.61528, 2.48723, 3.75742, 5.51404
11. (a) −1.45865, −0.217545, 1.05715, 1.41487
    (b) −1.45322, −0.180813, 1.05903, 1.41244
    (c) −1.43600, −0.0681657, 1.06489, 1.40575
    (d) −1.44190, −0.105737, 1.06290, 1.40789
12. (a) 0.587987, 0.791589, 1.14743, 1.70973
    (b) 0.589440, 0.795758, 1.15693, 1.72955
    (c) 0.593901, 0.808716, 1.18687, 1.79291
    (d) 0.592396, 0.804319, 1.17664, 1.77111
15. 1.595, 2.4636
16. en+1 = [2φ(t n ) − 1]h2 , |en+1 | ≤ [1 + 2 max0≤t≤1 |φ(t)|] h2 ,
    en+1 = e2t n h2 , |e1 | ≤ 0.012, |e4 | ≤ 0.022
17. en+1 = [2φ(t n ) − t n ]h2 , |en+1 | ≤ [1 + 2 max0≤t≤1 |φ(t)|] h2 ,
    en+1 = 2e2t n h2 , |e1 | ≤ 0.024, |e4 | ≤ 0.045
                     2
18. en+1 = [t n + t n φ(t n ) + φ3 (t n )]h2
19. en+1 = [19 − 15t n φ−1/2 (t n )]h2 /4
20. en+1 = {1 + [t n + φ(t n )]−1/2 }h2 /4
                                2
21. en+1 = {2 − [φ(t n ) + 2t n ] exp[−t n φ(t n )] − t n exp[−2t n φ(t n )]}h2 /2
22. (a) φ(t) = √  1 + (1/5π) sin 5πt            (b) 1.2, 1.0, 1.2      (c) 1.1, 1.1, 1.0, 1.0
    (d) h < 1/ 50π ∼       = 0.08
24. en+1 = − 21 φ (t n )h2
25. (a) 1.55, 2.34, 3.46, 5.07               (b) 1.20, 1.39, 1.57, 1.74          (c) 1.20, 1.42, 1.65, 1.90
26. (a) 0        (b) 60         (c) −92.16
27. 0.224 = 0.225
Section 8.2, page 466
 1. (a) 1.19512, 1.38120, 1.55909, 1.72956
    (b) 1.19515, 1.38125, 1.55916, 1.72965
    (c) 1.19516, 1.38126, 1.55918, 1.72967
 2. (a) 1.62283, 1.33460, 1.12820, 0.995445
    (b) 1.62243, 1.33386, 1.12718, 0.994215
    (c) 1.62234, 1.33368, 1.12693, 0.993921
 3. (a) 1.20526, 1.42273, 1.65511, 1.90570
    (b) 1.20533, 1.42290, 1.65542, 1.90621
    (c) 1.20534, 1.42294, 1.65550, 1.90634
 4. (a) 1.10483, 1.21882, 1.34146, 1.47263
    (b) 1.10484, 1.21884, 1.34147, 1.47262
    (c) 1.10484, 1.21884, 1.34147, 1.47262
 5. (a) 0.510164, 0.524126, 0.542083, 0.564251
    (b) 0.510168, 0.524135, 0.542100, 0.564277
    (c) 0.510169, 0.524137, 0.542104, 0.564284
 6. (a) −0.924650, −0.864338, −0.816642, −0.780008
    (b) −0.924550, −0.864177, −0.816442, −0.779781
    (c) −0.924525, −0.864138, −0.816393, −0.779725
 7. (a) 2.96719, 7.88313, 20.8114, 55.5106
    (b) 2.96800, 7.88755, 20.8294, 55.5758
 8. (a) 0.926139, 1.28558, 2.40898, 4.10386
    (b) 0.925815, 1.28525, 2.40869, 4.10359
 9. (a) 3.96217, 5.10887, 6.43134, 7.92332
    (b) 3.96218, 5.10889, 6.43138, 7.92337
10. (a) 1.61263, 2.48097, 3.74556, 5.49595
    (b) 1.61263, 2.48092, 3.74550, 5.49589
11. (a) −1.44768, −0.144478, 1.06004, 1.40960
    (b) −1.44765, −0.143690, 1.06072, 1.40999
12. (a) 0.590897, 0.799950, 1.16653, 1.74969
    (b) 0.590906, 0.799988, 1.16663, 1.74992
15. en+1 = (38h3 /3) exp(4t n ), |en+1 | ≤ 37, 758.8h3 on 0 ≤ t ≤ 2, |e1 | ≤ 0.00193389
16. en+1 = (2h3 /3) exp(2t n ), |en+1 | ≤ 4.92604h3 on 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, |e1 | ≤ 0.000814269
17. en+1 = (4h3 /3) exp(2t n ),    |en+1 | ≤ 9.85207h3 on 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, |e1 | ≤ 0.00162854
      ∼
18. h = 0.036
19. h ∼
      = 0.023
20. h ∼
      = 0.081                                     21. h ∼
                                                        = 0.117
23. 1.19512, 1.38120, 1.55909, 1.72956            24. 1.62268, 1.33435, 1.12789, 0.995130
25. 1.20526, 1.42273, 1.65511, 1.90570            26. 1.10485, 1.21886, 1.34149, 1.47264
Section 8.3, page 471
 1. (a) 1.19516, 1.38127, 1.55918, 1.72968
    (b) 1.19516, 1.38127, 1.55918, 1.72968
 2. (a) 1.62231, 1.33362, 1.12686, 0.993839
    (b) 1.62230, 1.33362, 1.12685, 0.993826
 3. (a) 1.20535, 1.42295, 1.65553, 1.90638
    (b) 1.20535, 1.42296, 1.65553, 1.90638
 4. (a) 1.10484, 1.21884, 1.34147, 1.47262
    (b) 1.10484, 1.21884, 1.34147, 1.47262
 5. (a) 0.510170, 0.524138, 0.542105, 0.564286
    (b) 0.520169, 0.524138, 0.542105, 0.564286
 6. (a) −0.924517, −0.864125, −0.816377, −0.779706
    (b) −0.924517, −0.864125, −0.816377, −0.779706
 7. (a) 2.96825, 7.88889, 20.8349, 55.5957
    (b) 2.96828, 7.88904, 20.8355, 55.5980
 8. (a) 0.925725, 1.28516, 2.40860, 4.10350
    (b) 0.925711, 1.28515, 2.40860, 4.10350
 9. (a) 3.96219, 5.10890, 6.43139, 7.92338
    (b) 3.96219, 5.10890, 6.43139, 7.92338
10. (a) 1.61262, 2.48091, 3.74548, 5.49587
    (b) 1.61262, 2.48091, 3.74548, 5.49587
11. (a) −1.44764, −0.143543, 1.06089, 1.41008
    (b) −1.44764, −0.143427, 1.06095, 1.41011
12. (a) 0.590909, 0.800000, 1.166667, 1.75000
    (b) 0.590909, 0.800000, 1.166667, 1.75000
Section 8.4, page 478
 1. (a) 1.7296801, 1.8934697                 2. (a) 0.993852, 0.925764
    (b) 1.7296802, 1.8934698                    (b) 0.993846, 0.925746
    (c) 1.7296805, 1.8934711                    (c) 0.993869, 0.925837
 3. (a) 1.906382, 2.179567                   4. (a) 1.4726173, 1.6126215
    (b) 1.906391, 2.179582                      (b) 1.4726189, 1.6126231
    (c) 1.906395, 2.179611                      (c) 1.4726199, 1.6126256
 5. (a) 0.56428577, 0.59090918               6. (a) −0.779693, −0.753135
    (b) 0.56428581, 0.59090923                  (b) −0.779692, −0.753137
    (c) 0.56428588, 0.59090952                  (b) −0.779680, −0.753089
 7. (a) 2.96828, 7.88907, 20.8356, 55.5984
    (b) 2.96829, 7.88909, 20.8357, 55.5986
    (c) 2.96831, 7.88926, 20.8364, 55.6015
 8. (a) 0.9257133, 1.285148, 2.408595, 4.103495
    (b) 0.9257124, 1.285148, 2.408595, 4.103495
    (c) 0.9257248, 1.285158, 2.408594, 4.103493
 9. (a) 3.962186, 5.108903, 6.431390, 7.923385
    (b) 3.962186, 5.108903, 6.431390, 7.923385
    (c) 3.962186, 5.108903, 6.431390, 7.923385
10. (a) 1.612622, 2.480909, 3.745479, 5.495872
    (b) 1.612622, 2.480909, 3.745479, 5.495873
    (c) 1.612623, 2.480905, 3.745473, 5.495869
11. (a) −1.447639, −0.1436281, 1.060946, 1.410122
    (b) −1.447638, −0.1436762, 1.060913, 1.410103
    (c) −1.447621, −0.1447219, 1.060717, 1.410027
12. (a) 0.5909091, 0.8000000, 1.166667, 1.750000
    (b) 0.5909091, 0.8000000, 1.166667, 1.750000
    (c) 0.5909092, 0.8000002, 1.166667, 1.750001
Section 8.5, page 481
 1. (a) 1.26, 0.76; 1.7714, 1.4824; 2.58991, 2.3703; 3.82374, 3.60413;
    5.64246, 5.38885
    (b) 1.32493, 0.758933; 1.93679, 1.57919; 2.93414, 2.66099; 4.48318, 4.22639;
    6.84236, 6.56452
    (c) 1.32489, 0.759516; 1.9369, 1.57999; 2.93459, 2.66201; 4.48422, 4.22784;
    6.8444, 6.56684
 2. (a) 1.451, 1.232; 2.16133, 1.65988; 3.29292, 2.55559; 5.16361, 4.7916;
    8.54951, 12.0464
    (b) 1.51844, 1.28089; 2.37684, 1.87711; 3.85039, 3.44859; 6.6956, 9.50309;
    15.0987, 64.074
    (c) 1.51855, 1.2809; 2.3773, 1.87729; 3.85247, 3.45126; 6.71282, 9.56846;
    15.6384, 70.3792
 3. (a) 0.582, 1.18; 0.117969, 1.27344; −0.336912, 1.27382; −0.730007, 1.18572;
    −1.02134, 1.02371
    (b) 0.568451, 1.15775; 0.109776, 1.22556; −0.32208, 1.20347;
    −0.681296, 1.10162; −0.937852, 0.937852
    (c) 0.56845, 1.15775; 0.109773, 1.22557; −0.322081, 1.20347;
    −0.681291, 1.10161; −0.937841, 0.93784
 4. (a) −0.198, 0.618; −0.378796, 0.28329; −0.51932, −0.0321025;
    −0.594324, −0.326801; −0.588278, −0.57545
                    (b) −0.196904, 0.630936; −0.372643, 0.298888; −0.501302, −0.0111429;
                    −0.561270, −0.288943; −0.547053, −0.508303
                    (c) −0.196935, 0.630939; −0.372687, 0.298866; −0.501345, −0.0112184;
                    −0.561292, −0.28907; −0.547031, −0.508427
                 5. (a) 2.96225, 1.34538; 2.34119, 1.67121; 1.90236, 1.97158; 1.56602, 2.23895;
                    1.29768, 2.46732
                    (b) 3.06339, 1.34858; 2.44497, 1.68638; 1.9911, 2.00036; 1.63818, 2.27981;
                    1.3555, 2.5175
                    (c) 3.06314, 1.34899; 2.44465, 1.68699; 1.99075, 2.00107; 1.63781, 2.28057;
                    1.35514, 2.51827
                 6. (a) 1.42386, 2.18957; 1.82234, 2.36791; 2.21728, 2.53329; 2.61118, 2.68763;
                    2.9955, 2.83354
                    (b) 1.41513, 2.18699; 1.81208, 2.36233; 2.20635, 2.5258; 2.59826, 2.6794;
                    2.97806, 2.82487
                    (c) 1.41513, 2.18699; 1.81209, 2.36233; 2.20635, 2.52581; 2.59826, 2.67941;
                    2.97806, 2.82488
                 7. For h = 0.05 and 0.025: x = 10.227, y = −4.9294; these results agree with the exact
                    solution to five digits.
                 8. 1.543, 0.0707503; 1.14743, −1.3885                   9. 1.99521, −0.662442
                Section 8.6, page 491
                 1. (b) φ2 (t) − φ1 (t) = 0.001et → ∞ as t → ∞
                 2. (b) φ1 (t) = ln[et /(2 − et )]; φ2 (t) = ln[1/(1 − t)]
                 3. (a, b) h = 0.00025 is sufficient. (c) h = 0.005 is sufficient.
                 4. (a) y = 4e−10t + (t 2 /4) (c) Runge–Kutta is stable for h = 0.25 but unstable for h = 0.3.
                    (d) h = 5/13 ∼  = 0.384615 is small enough.
                 5. (a) y = t                                            6. (a) y = t 2
C H A P T E R 9 Section 9.1, page 505
                 1. (a) r1 = −1, ξ (1) = (1, 2)T ; r2 = 2, ξ (2) = (2, 1)T           (b) saddle point, unstable
                 2. (a) r1 = 2, ξ (1) = (1, 3)T ; r2 = 4, ξ (2) = (1, 1)T          (b) node, unstable
                 3. (a) r1 = −1, ξ (1) = (1, 3)T ; r2 = 1, ξ (2) = (1, 1)T           (b) saddle point, unstable
                 4. (a) r1 = r2 = −3, ξ (1) = (1, 1)T            (b) improper node, asymptotically stable
                 5. (a) r1 , r2 = −1 ± i; ξ (1) , ξ (2) = (2 ± i, 1)T       (b) spiral point, asymptotically stable
                 6. (a) r1 , r2 = ±i; ξ (1) , ξ (2) = (2 ± i, 1)T       (b) center, stable
                 7. (a) r1 , r2 = 1 ± 2i; ξ (1) , ξ (2) = (1, 1 ∓ i)T      (b) spiral point, unstable
                 8. (a) r1 = −1, ξ (1) = (1, 0)T ; r2 = −1/4, ξ (2) = (4, −3)T
                    (b) node, asymptotically stable
                 9. (a) r1 = r2 = 1, ξ (1) = (2, 1)T           (b) improper node, unstable
                10. (a) r1 , r2 = ±3i; ξ (1) , ξ (2) = (2, −1 ± 3i)T        (b) center, stable
                11. (a) r1 = r2 = −1; ξ (1) = (1, 0)T , ξ (2) = (0, 1)T
                    (b) proper node, asymptotically stable
                12. (a) r1 , r2 = (1 ± 3i)/2; √ξ (1) , ξ (2) =√(5, 3 ∓ 3i)T      (b) spiral point, unstable
                13. x0 = 1, y0 = 1; r1 = 2, r2 = − 2; saddle point, unstable
                14. x0 = −1, y0 = 0; r1 = −1, r2 = √          −3; node, asymptotically stable
                15. x0 = −2, y0 = 1; r1 , r2 = −1 ± 2 i; spiral point, asymptotically stable
                                                            √
                16. x0 = γ/δ, y0 = α/β; r1 , r2 = ± βδ i; center, stable
                17. c2 > 4km, node, asymptotically stable; c2 = 4km, improper node, asymptotically stable;
                    c2 < 4km, spiral point, asymptotically stable
Section 9.2, page 517
 1. x = 4e−t , y = 2e−2t , y = x2 /8
 2. x = 4e−t , y = 2e2t , y = 32x−2 ; x = 4e−t , y = 0
 3. x = 4 cos t, y = 4 sin t, x2 + y2 = 16; x = −4 sin t, y = 4 cos t, x2 + y2 = 16
             √       √             √          √
 4. x = a cos ab t, y = − b sin ab t; (x2 /a) + (y2 /b) = 1
 5. (a, c) (− 21 , 1), saddle point, unstable; (0, 0), (proper) node, unstable
                   √                                          √
 6. (a, c) (− 3/3, − 21 ), saddle point, unstable; ( 3/3, − 21 ), center, stable
 7. (a, c) (0, 0), node, unstable; (2, 0), node, asymptotically stable;
    (0, 23 ), saddle point, unstable; (−1, 3), node, asymptotically stable
 8. (a, c) (0, 0), node, asymptotically stable; (1, −1), saddle point, unstable;
    (1, −2), spiral point, asymptotically stable
 9. (a, c)√(0, 0), spiral
                       √     point, asymptotically stable; √            √
    (1 − 2, 1 + 2), saddle point, unstable; (1 + 2, 1 − 2), saddle point, unstable
10. (a, c) (0, 0), saddle point, unstable; (2, 2), spiral point, asymptotically stable;
    (−1, −1), spiral point, asymptotically stable; (−2, 0), saddle point, unstable
11. (a, c) (0, 0), saddle point, unstable; (0, 1), saddle point, unstable;
    ( 21 , 21 ), center, stable; (− 21 , 21 ), center, stable
                                                     √
12. (a,√  c) (0, 0), saddle point, unstable; ( 6, 0), spiral point, asymptotically stable;
    (− 6, 0), spiral point, asymptotically stable
13. (a, c) (0, 0), saddle point, unstable; (−2, 2), node, unstable;
    (4, 4), spiral point, asymptotically stable
14. (a, c) (0, 0), saddle point, unstable; (2, 0), saddle point, unstable;
    (1, 1), spiral point, asymptotically stable; (−2, −2), spiral point, asymptotically stable
15. (a, c) (0, 0), node, unstable; (1, 1), saddle point, unstable;
    (3, −1), spiral point, asymptotically stable
16. (a, c) (0, 1), saddle point, unstable; (1, 1), node, asymptotically stable;
    (−2, 4), spiral point, unstable
17. (a) 4x2 − y2 = c                                    18. (a) 4x2 + y2 = c      
19. (a) (y − 2x)2 (x + y) = c                           20. (a) arctan(y/x) − ln x2 + y2 = c
21. (a) 2x2 y − 2xy + y2 = c                            22. (a) x2 y2 − 3x2 y − 2y2 = c
23. (a) (y /2) − cos x = c
                2
                                                        24. (a) x2 + y2 − (x4 /12) = c
Section 9.3, page 527
 1. linear and nonlinear: saddle point, unstable
 2. linear and nonlinear: spiral point, asymptotically stable
 3. linear: center, stable; nonlinear: spiral point or center, indeterminate
 4. linear: improper node, unstable; nonlinear: node or spiral point, unstable
                                                                       √
 5. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = −2u + 2v, v = 4u + 4v; r = 1 ± 17;
    saddle point, unstable
    (−2, 2); u = 4u, v = 6u + 6v; r = 4, 6; node,          √     unstable
    (4, 4); u = −6u + 6v, v = −8u; r = −3 ± 39 i; spiral point, asymptotically
    stable
 6. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = u, v = 3v; r = 1, 3; node, unstable
    (1, 0); u = −u − v, v = 2v; r = −1, 2; saddle point, unstable
    (0, 23 ); u = − 21 u, v = − 23 u − 3v; r = − 21 , −3; node, asymptotically stable
                                                                √
    (−1, 2); u = u + v, v = −2u − 4v; r = (−3 ± 17)/2; saddle point, unstable
 7. (a, b, c) (1, 1); u = −v, v = 2u − 2v; r = −1 ± i; spiral point, asymptotically
    stable                                                    √
    (−1, 1); u = −v, v = −2u − 2v; r = −1 ± 3; saddle point, unstable
 8. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = u, v = 21 v; r = 1, 21 ; node, unstable
    (0, 2); u = −u, v = − 23 u − 21 v; r = −1, − 21 ; node, asymptotically stable
    (1, 0); u = −u − v,            v = − 14 v; r = −1, − 41 ; node, asymptotically stable
                                                                     √
    ( 21 , 21 ); u = − 21 u − 21 v, v = − 38 u − 18 v; r = (−5 ± 57)/16;
    saddle point, unstable
                                                                      √
 9. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = −u + 2v, v = u + 2v; r √           = (1 ± 17/2; saddle point, unstable
    (2, 1); u = − 23 u + 3v, v = −2u; r = (−3 ± 87i)/4; spiral point, asymptotically
    stable                                        √
    (2, −2); u = −3v, v = u; r = ± 3 i; center              √ or spiral point, indeterminate
    (4, −2); u = −4v, v = −u − 2v; r = −1 ± 5; saddle point, unstable
10. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = u, v = v; r = 1, 1; node or spiral point, unstable
    (−1, 0); u = −u, v = 2v; r = −1, 2; saddle point, unstable
                                                                 √
11. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = 2u + v, v = u − 2v; r = ± 5; saddle point, unstable
    (−1.1935, −1.4797); u = −1.2399u − 6.8393v, v = 2.4797u − 0.80655v;
    r = −1.0232 ± 4.1125i; spiral point, asymptotically stable
12. (a, b, c) (0, ±2nπ), n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ; u = v, v = −u;
    r = ±i; center or spiral point, indeterminate                             √
    [2, ±(2n − 1)π], n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ; u = −3v, v = −u; r = ± 3;
    saddle point, unstable
13. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = u, v = v; r = 1, 1; node or spiral point, unstable
    (1, 1); u = u − 2v, v = −2u + v; r = 3, −1; saddle point, unstable
14. (a, b, c) (1, 1); u = −u − v, v = u − 3v; r = −2, −2;
    node or spiral point, asymptotically stable                √
    (−1, −1); u = u + v, v = u − 3v; r = −1 ± 5; saddle point, unstable
                                                                       √
15. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = −2u − v, v = u − v; r = (−3 ± 3 i)/2;
    spiral point, asymptotically stable
    (−0.33076, 1.0924) and (0.33076, −1.0924); u = −3.5216u − 0.27735v,
    v = 0.27735u + 2.6895v; r = −3.5092, 2.6771; saddle point, unstable
16. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = u + v, v = −u + v; r = 1 ± i; spiral point, unstable
                                                                     √
17. (a, b, c) (2, 2); u = −4v, v = − 27 u + 27 v; r = (7 ± 273)/4; saddle point, unstable
                                                               √
    (−2, −2); u = 4v, v = 21 u − 21 v; r = (−1 ± 33)/4; saddle point, unstable
                                                    √
    (− 23 , 2); u = −4v, v = 27 u; r = ± 14 i; center or spiral point, indeterminate
                                                       √
    (− 23 , −2); u = 4v, v = − 21 u; r = ± 2 i; center or spiral point, indeterminate
                                                                       √
18. (a, b, c) (0, 0); u = 2u − v, v = 2u − 4v; r = −1 ± 7; saddle point, unstable
    (2, 1); u = −3v, v = 4u − 8v; r = √             −2, −6; node, asymptotically stable
    (−2, 1); u = 5v, v = −4u; r = ±2 5 i; √                center or spiral point, indeterminate
    (−2, −4); u = 10u − 5v, v = 6u; r = 5 ± 5 i; spiral point, unstable
21. (b, c) Refer to Table 9.3.1.
23. (a) R = A, T ∼        = 3.17        (b) R = A, T ∼     = 3.20, 3.35, 3.63, 4.17
    (c) T → π as A → 0                (d) A = π
24. (b) vc ∼    = 4.00                                   25. (b) vc ∼
                                                                    = 4.51
30. (a) dx/dt = y, dy/dt = −g(x) − c(x)y
    (b) The linear system is dx/dt = y, dy/dt = −g (0)x − c(0)y.
    (c) The eigenvalues satisfy r 2 + c(0)r + g  (0) = 0.
Section 9.4, page 541
 1. (b, c) (0, 0); u = 23 u, v = 2v; r = 23 , 2; node, unstable
    (0, 2); u = 21 u, v = − 23 u − 2v; r = 21 , −2; saddle point, unstable
    ( 23 , 0); u = − 23 u − 34 v, v = 78 v; r = − 23 , 78 ; saddle point, unstable
                                                                               √
    ( 45 , 75 ); u = − 45 u − 25 v, v = − 20    21
                                                      u − 75 v; r = (−22 ± 204)/20;
    node, asymptotically stable
 2. (b, c) (0, 0); u = 23 u, v = 2v;                 r = 23 , 2; node, unstable
                                  
    (0, 4); u = − 2 u, v = −6u − 2v; r = − 21 , −2; node, asymptotically stable
                            1
    ( 23 , 0); u = − 23 u − 34 v, v = − 14 v; r = − 14 , − 23 ; node, asymptotically stable
                                                                            √
    (1, 1); u = −u − 21 v, v = − 23 u − 21 v; r = (−3 ± 13)/4;
    saddle point, unstable
 3. (b, c) (0, 0); u = 23 u, v = 2v; r = 23 , 2; node, unstable
    (0, 2); u = − 21 u, v = − 94 u − 2v; r = − 21 , −2; node, asymptotically stable
    (3, 0); u = − 23 u − 3v, v = − 11           8
                                                     v; r = − 23 , − 118 ; node, asymptotically stable
                                         
    ( 5 , 10 ); u = − 5 u − 5 v, v = − 80 u − 10
      4 11                    2      4              99      11
                                                                v; r = −1.80475, 0.30475;
    saddle point, unstable
 4. (b, c) (0, 0); u = 23 u, v = 34 v; r = 23 , 43 ; node, unstable
    (0, 43 ); u = 34 u, v = − 34 v; r = ± 34 ; saddle point, unstable
    (3, 0); u = − 23 u − 3v, v = 38 v; r = − 23 , 38 ; saddle point, unstable
    (2, 21 ); u = −u − 2v, v = − 16           1
                                                  u − 21 v; r = −1.18301, −0.31699;
    node, asymptotically stable
 5. (b, c) (0, 0); u = u, v = 23 v; r = 1, 23 ; node, unstable
    (0, 23 ); u = − 21 u, v = − 23 u − 23 v; r = − 21 , − 23 ; node, asymptotically stable
    (1, 0); u = −u − v, v = 21 v; r = −1, 21 ; saddle point, unstable
 6. (b, c) (0, 0);         u = u, v = 25 v;       r = 1, 25 ; node, unstable
                                
    (0, 53 );     u   = 116 u,  v = 12 u − 2 v; r = 11
                                       5       5
                                                              6
                                                                 , − 25 ; saddle point, unstable
                                       
    (1, 0);       u = −u + 2 v, v = 4 v; r = −1, 11
                                1           11
                                                                     ; saddle point, unstable
                                            
                                                                   4
                                                                              √
    (2, 2);             u = −2u + v, v = 2 u − 3v; r = (−5 ± 3)/2;
                                                    1
    node, asymptotically stable
 8. (a) Critical points are x = 0, y = 0; x = 1 /σ1 , y = 0; x = 0, y = 2 /σ2 .
    x → 0, y → 2 /σ2 as t → ∞; the redear survive.
    (b) Same as part (a) except x → 1 /σ1 , y → 0 as t → ∞; the bluegill survive.
 9. (a) X = (B − γ1 R)/(1 − γ1 γ2 ), Y = (R − γ2 B)/(1 − γ1 γ2 )
    (b) X is reduced, Y is increased; yes, if B becomes less than γ1 R, then x → 0 and y → R
    as t → ∞.
10. (a) σ1 2 − α2 1  = 0: (0, 0), (0, 2 /σ2 ), (1 /σ1 , 0)
    σ1 2 − α2 1 = 0: (0, 0), and all points on the line σ1 x + α1 y = 1
    (b) σ1 2 − α2 1 > 0: (0, 0) is unstable node; (1 /σ1 , 0) is saddle point;
    (0, 2 /σ2 ) is asymptotically stable node.
    σ1 2 − α2 1 < 0: (0, 0) is unstable node; (0, 2 /σ2 ) is saddle point;
    (1 /σ1 , 0) is asymptotically stable node.
    (c) (0, 0) is unstable node; points on the line σ1 x + α1 y = 1 are stable, nonisolated critical
    points.
12. (a) (0, 0), saddle point; (0.15, 0), spiral point if γ 2 < 1.11, node if γ 2 ≥ 1.11; (2, 0), saddle
    point
    (c) γ ∼     = 1.20
13. (b) (2 − 4 − 23 α, 23 α), (2 + 4 − 23 α, 23 α)
    (c) (1, 3) is an asymptotically stable node; (3, 3) is a saddle point
    (d) α0 = 8/3; critical point is (2, 4); λ = 0, −1
14. (b) (2 − 4 − 23 α, 23 α), (2 + 4 − 23 α, 23 α)
    (c) 1, 3) is a saddle point; (3, 3) is an unstable spiral point
    (d) α0 = 8/3; critical point is (2, 4); λ = 0, 1
                   √                          √
15. (b) ([3 − √ 9 − 4α]/2, [3 + 2α − √ 9 − 4α]/2),
            ([3 + 9 − 4α]/2, [3 + 2α + 9 − 4α]/2)
    (c) (1, 3) is a saddle point; (2, 4) is an unstable spiral point
    (d) α0 = 9/4; critical point is (3/2, 15/4); λ = 0, 0
                   √                          √
16. (b) ([3 − √      9 − 4α]/2, [3 + 2α − √     9 − 4α]/2),
               ([3 + 9 − 4α]/2, [3 + 2α + 9 − 4α]/2)
    (c) (1, 3) is a center of the linear approximation and also of the nonlinear system; (2, 4) is
    a saddle point
    (d) α0 = 9/4; critical point is (3/2, 15/4); λ = 0, 0
17. (b) P1 (0, 0), P2 (1, 0), P3 (0, α), P4 (2 − 2α, −1 + 2α). P4 is in the first quadrant for
    0.5 ≤ α ≤ 1.
    (c) α = 0; P3 coincides with P1 . α = 0.5; P4 coincides with P2 . α = 1; P4 coincides with
    P3 .                                           
                     1 − 2x − y          −x
    (d) J =            −0.5y        α − 2y − 0.5x
    (e) P1 is an unstable node for α > 0. P2 is an asymptotically stable node for 0 < α < 0.5
    and a saddle point for α > 0.5. P3 is a saddle point for 0 < α < 1 and an asymptotically
    stable node for α > 1. P4 is an asymptotically stable node for 0.5 < α < 1.
18. (b) P1 (0, 0), P2 (1, 0), P3 (0, 0.75/α), P4 [(4α − 3)/(4α − 2), 1/(4α − 2)]. P4 is in the
    first quadrant for α ≥ 0.75.
    (c) α = 0.75;  P3 coincides with P4 .               
                     1 − 2x − y             −x
    (d) J =            −0.5y        0.75 − 2αy − 0.5x
    (e) P1 is an unstable node. P2 is a saddle point. P3 is an asymptotically stable node for
    0 < α < 0.75 and a saddle point for α > 0.75. P4 is an asymptotically stable node for
    α > 0.75.
19. (b) P1 (0, 0), P2 (1, 0), P3 (0, α), P4 (0.5, 0.5). In addition, for α = 1 every point on the
    line x + y = 1 is a critical point.
    (c) α = 0;     P3 coincides with P1 . Also α = 1. 
                     1 − 2x − y               −x
    (d) J =          −(2α − 1)y α − 2y − (2α − 1)x
    (e) P1 is an unstable node for α > 0. P2 and P3 are saddle points for 0 < α < 1 and asymp-
    totically stable nodes for α > 1. P4 is an asymptotically stable spiral point for
    0 < α < 0.5, an asymptotically stable node for 0.5 ≤ α < 1, and a saddle point for α > 1.
Section 9.5, page 551
 1. (b, c) (0, 0);      u = 23 u, v = − 21 v;  r = 3 , − 1 ; saddle point, unstable
                                                 √ 2 2
    ( 21 , 3);    u = − 41 v, v = 3u;   r = ± 3 i/2; center or spiral point, indeterminate
 2. (b, c) (0, 0); u = u, v = − 14 v; r = 1, − 41 ; saddle point, unstable
    ( 21 , 2); u = − 14 v, v = u; r = ± 21 i; center or spiral point, indeterminate
 3. (b, c) (0, 0); u = u, v = − 14 v; r = 1, − 41 ; saddle point, unstable
    (2, 0); u = −u − v, v = 34 v; r = −1, 34 ; saddle point, unstable
                                                                 √
    ( 21 , 23 ); u = − 41 u − 41 v, v = 34 u; r = (−1 ± 11 i)/8; spiral point,
    asymptotically stable
 4. (b, c) (0, 0); u = 98 u, v = −v; r = 98 , −1; saddle point, unstable
    ( 98 , 0); u = − 98 u − 16 9
                                   v, v = 18 v; r = − 98 , 18 ; saddle point, unstable
                                                             √
    (1, 41 ); u = −u − 21 v, v = 14 u; r = (−1 ± 0.5)/2; node, asymptotically stable
 5. (b, c) (0, 0); u = −u, v = − 23 v; r = −1, − 23 ; node, asymptotically stable
    ( 21 , 0); u = 43 u − 203 v, v = −v; r = −1, 34 ; saddle point, unstable
    (2, 0); u = −3u − 35 v, v = 21 v; r = −3, 21 ; saddle point, unstable
                                                                  √
    ( 23 , 53 ); u = − 34 u − 209 v, v = 53 u; r = (−3 ± 39 i)/8; spiral point,
    asymptotically stable
 6. (b, c) t = 0, T, 2T, . . . :              H is a max.,             dP/dt is a max.
                 t = T/4, 5T/4, . . . :       dH/dt is a min.,         P is a max.
                 t = T/2, 3T/2, . . . :       H is a min.,             dP/dt is a min.
                 t = 3T/4, 7T/4, . . . :      dH/dt is a max.,         P is a min.
             √     √                √
 7. (a) c α/ a γ             (b) 3
    (d) The ratio of prey amplitude to predator amplitude increases very slowly as the initial
    point moves  √ away from the equilibrium point.
 8. (a) 4π/ 3 ∼      = 7.2552
    (c) The period increases slowly as the initial point moves away from the equilibrium point.
 9. (a) T ∼     = 6.5 (b) T ∼    = 3.7, T ∼= 11.5 (c) T ∼       = 3.8, T ∼
                                                                         = 11.1
11. (a) P1 (0, 0), P2 (1/σ, 0), P3 (3, 2 − 6σ); P2 moves to the left and P3 moves down; they
    coincide at (3, 0) when σ = 1/3.
    (b) P1 is a saddle point. P2 is a saddle point for σ < 1/3 and an asymptotically
                                                                                           stable node
    for σ > 1/3. P3 is an asymptotically stable spiral point for σ < σ1 = ( 7/3 − 1)/2 ∼      = 0.2638,
    an asymptotically stable node for σ1 < σ < 1/3, and a saddle point for σ > 1/3.
12. (a) P1 (0, 0), P2 (a/σ, 0), P3 [c/γ, (a/α) − (cσ/αγ)]; P2 moves to the left and P3 moves
    down; they coincide at (c/γ, 0) when σ = aγ/c.
    (b) P1 is a saddle point. P2 is a saddle point for σ < aγ/c and an asymptotically stable
    node for σ > aγ/c. P3 is an asymptotically stable spiral point for sufficiently small values
    of σ and becomes an asymptotically stable node at a certain value σ1 < aγ/c. P3 is a saddle
    point for σ > aγ/c.
13. (a, b) P1 (0, 0) is a saddle point; P2 (5, 0) is a saddle point; P3 (2, 2.4) is an asymptotically
    stable spiral point.
14. (b) same prey, fewer predators               (c) more prey, same predators
    (d) more prey, fewer predators
15. (b) same prey, fewer predators               (c) more prey, fewer predators
    (d) more prey, even fewer predators
16. (b) same prey, fewer predators               (c) more prey, same predators
    (d) more prey, fewer predators
Section 9.7, page 574
 1. r = 1, θ = t + t0 , stable limit cycle               2. r = 1, θ = −t + t0 , semistable limit cycle
 3. r = 1, θ = t + t0 , stable limit cycle; r = 3, θ = t + t0 , unstable periodic solution
 4. r = 1, θ = −t + t0 , unstable periodic solution; r = 2, θ = −t + t0 , stable limit cycle
 5. r = 2n − 1, θ = t + t0 , n = 1, 2, 3, . . . , stable limit cycle;
    r = 2n, θ = t + t0 , n = 1, 2, 3, . . . , unstable periodic solution
 6. r = 2, θ = −t + t0 , semistable limit cycle;
    r = 3, θ = −t + t0 , unstable periodic solution
 8. (a) Counterclockwise
    (b) r = 1, θ = t + t0 , stable limit cycle; r = 2, θ = t + t0 , semistable limit cycle;
    r=√  3, θ = t + t0 , unstable periodic solution
 9. r = 2, θ = −t + t0 , unstable periodic solution
14. (a) μ = 0.2, T ∼   = 6.29; μ = 1, T ∼    = 6.66; μ = 5, T ∼   = 11.60
15. (a) x = y, y = −x + μy − μy3 /3
    (b) 0 < μ < 2, unstable spiral point; μ ≥ 2, unstable node
    (c) A ∼ = 2.16, T ∼ = 6.65
    (d) μ = 0.2, A ∼   = 1.99, T ∼  = 6.31; μ = 0.5, A ∼   = 2.03, T ∼ = 6.39;
        μ = 2, A ∼  = 2.60,  T ∼
                               =   7.65;   μ =  5, A ∼
                                                     =   4.36, T∼= 11.60
16. (b) x = μx + y, y = −x + μy;              λ = μ ± i; the origin is an asymptotically stable
    spiral point for μ < 0 and an unstable spiral point for μ > 0.
    (c) r  = r(μ − r 2 ), θ  = −1
17. (a) The origin is an asymptotically stable node for μ < −2, an asymptotically stable spiral
    point for −2 < μ < 0, an unstable spiral point for 0 < μ < 2, and an unstable node for
    μ > 2.
18. (a, b) (0, 0) is a saddle point; (12, 0) is a saddle point; (2, 8) is an unstable spiral point.
19. (a) (0, 0), (5a, 0), (2, 4a − 1.6) √
    (b) r = −0.25
                     + 0.125a ± 0.025 220 − 400a + 25a2 ; a0 = 2
                               
20. (b) λ = −(5/4 − b) ± (5/4 − b)2 − 1 /2
    (c) 0 < b < 1/4: asymptotically stable node; 1/4 < b < 5/4: asymptotically stable spiral
    point; 5/4 < b < 9/4: unstable spiral point; 9/4 < b; unstable node
    (d) b0 = 5/4
21. (b) k = 0, (1.1994, −0.62426); k = 0.5, (0.80485, −0.13106)
    (c) k0 ∼= 0.3465, (0.95450, −0.31813)
    (d) k = 0.4, T ∼   = 11.23; k = 0.5, T ∼     = 10.37; k = 0.6, T ∼     = 9.93
             ∼
    (e) k1 = 1.4035
Section 9.8, page 584
                                                                 √
 1. (b) λ = λ1 , ξ (1) = (0, 0,
                              √ 1)T ; λ = λ2 , ξ (2) = (20, 9 − 81 + 40r, 0)T ;
    λ = λ3 , ξ (3) = (20, 9 + 81 + 40r, 0)T
    (c) λ1 ∼= −2.6667, ξ (1) = (0, 0, 1)T ; λ2 ∼  = −22.8277, ξ (2) ∼= (20, −25.6554, 0)T ;
    λ3 ∼
       = 11.8277, ξ ∼ (3)
                          = (20, 43.6554, 0) T
 2. (c) λ1 ∼= −13.8546; λ2 , λ3 ∼    = 0.0939556 ± 10.1945i
 5. (a) dV/dt √   = −2σ[rx  2
                            √ + y 2
                                    +     − r)2 − br 2 ]
                                      b(z √
                                      √
11. (b) c = 0.5 : P1 ( 2/4, − 2, 2); λ = 0, −0.05178 ± 1.5242i
    c = 1 : P1 = (0.8536, −3.4142, 3.4142); λ = 0.1612, −0.02882 ± 2.0943i
    P2 (0.1464, −0.5858, 0.5858); λ = −0.5303, −0.03665 ± 1.1542i
12. (a) P1 (1.1954, −4.7817, 4.7817); λ = 0.1893, −0.02191 ± 2.4007i
    P2 (0.1046, −0.4183, 0.4183); λ = −0.9614, 0.007964 ± 1.0652i
    (d) T1 ∼ = 5.9
13. (a, b, c) c1 ∼= 1.243
14. (a) P1 (2.9577, −11.8310, 11.8310); λ = 0.2273, −0.009796 ± 3.5812i
    P2 (0.04226, −0.1690, 0.1690); λ = −2.9053, 0.09877 ± 0.9969i
    (c) T2 ∼ = 11.8
15. (a) P1 (3.7668, −15.0673, 15.0673); λ = 0.2324, −0.007814 ± 4.0078i
    P2 (0.03318, −0.1327, 0.1327); λ = −3.7335, 0.1083 ± 0.9941i
    (b) T4 ∼ = 23.6
C H A P T E R 10 Section 10.1, page 595
                                                                                     √          √          √       √
                  1. y = − sin x                                        2. y = (cot 2π cos 2x + sin 2x)/ 2
                  3. y = 0 for all L; y = c2 sin x if sin L = 0
                  4. y = − tan L cos x + sin x if cos L  = 0; no solution if cos L = 0
                  5. No solution √               √             √
                  6. y = (−π sin 2x + x sin 2π)/2 sin 2π
                  7. No solution                                        8. y = c2 sin 2x + 13 sin x
                  9. y = c1 cos 2x + 13 cos x                          10. y = 21 cos x
                 11. y = − 25 x + 23 x2                                12. y = − 19 x−1 + 19 (1 − e3 )x−1 ln x + 19 x2
                 13. No solution
                 14. λn = [(2n − 1)/2]2 , yn (x) = sin[(2n − 1)x/2]; n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
                 15. λn = [(2n − 1)/2]2 , yn (x) = cos[(2n − 1)x/2]; n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
                 16. λ0 = 0, y0 (x) = 1; λn = n2 , yn (x) = cos nx; n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
                 17. λn = [(2n − 1)π/2L]2 , yn (x) = cos[(2n − 1)πx/2L]; n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
                 18. λ0 = 0, y0 (x) = 1; λn = (nπ/L)2 , yn (x) = cos(nπx/L); n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
                 19. λn = −[(2n − 1)π/2L]2 , yn (x) = sin[(2n − 1)πx/2L]; n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
                 20. λn = 1 + (nπ/ ln L)2 , yn (x) = x sin(nπ ln x/ ln L); n = 1, 2, 3, . . .
                 21. (a) w(r) = G(R2 − r 2 )/4μ            (c) Q is reduced to 0.3164 of its original value.
                 22. (a) y = k(x4 − 2Lx3 + L3 x)/24             (b) y = k(x4 − 2Lx3 + L2 x2 )/24
                     (c) y = k(x − 4Lx + 6L x )/24
                                   4        3       2 2
                 Section 10.2, page 605
                  1. T = 2π/5                                           2. T = 1
                  3. Not periodic                                       4. T = 2L
                  5. T = 1                                              6. Not periodic
                  7. T = 2                                              8. T = 4
                  9. f (x) = 2L − x in L < x < 2L; f (x) = −2L − x in −3L < x < −2L
                 10. f (x) = x − 1 in 1 < x < 2; f (x) = x − 8 in 8 < x < 9
                 11. f (x) = −L − x in −L < x < 0
                                  2L  (−1)n                                                   2  sin[(2n − 1)πx/L]
                                        ∞                                                         ∞
                                                        nπx                              1
                 13. (b) f (x) =                   sin                 14. (b) f (x) = −
                                    π n=1 n              L                               2 π n=1            2n − 1
                                           ∞                                       
                                      π         2 cos(2n − 1)x (−1) sin nx n+1
                 15. (b) f (x) = − +                              +
                                      4    n=1
                                                  π(2n − 1)2                 n
                                         4  cos(2n − 1)πx
                                             ∞
                                  1
                 16. (b) f (x) =      + 2
                                  2 π n=1 (2n − 1)2
                                           ∞                                                         
                                  3L  2L cos[(2n − 1)πx/L] (−1)n+1 L sin(nπx/L)
                 17. (b) f (x) =        +                                  +
                                    4                  (2n − 1)2 π2                     nπ
                                          n=1
                                                                           
                                   ∞
                                            2      nπ         2   2
                                                                        nπ        nπx
                 18. (b) f (x) =         −     cos       +          sin       sin
                                  n=1
                                           nπ        2       nπ          2         2
                                   4  sin[(2n − 1)πx/2]
                                       ∞
                 19. (b) f (x) =
                                  π n=1         2n − 1
                                   2  (−1)n+1
                                       ∞
                 20. (b) f (x) =                    sin nπx
                                  π n=1       n
                                         8  (−1)n
                                             ∞
                                  2                          nπx
                 21. (b) f (x) =      + 2                cos
                                  3 π n=1 n2                  2
                        12  cos[(2n − 1)πx/2]            2  (−1)n
                              ∞                               ∞
                   1                                                           nπx
22. (b) f (x) =      + 2                               +                  sin
                   2 π n=1             (2n − 1)2          π n=1 n                2
                                                                                           
                           1  (−1)n − 5            nπx  4[1 − (−1)n ] (−1)n
                               ∞                             ∞
                   11                                                                             nπx
23. (b) f (x) =        + 2                     cos       +                          −         sin
                   12 π n=1             n2           2      n=1
                                                                      n  3 π3         nπ           2
                                                             
                   9  162[(−1)n − 1] 27(−1)n                        nπx  108(−1)n + 54
                          ∞                                                     ∞
                                                                                                       nπx
24. (b) f (x) = +                                 −             cos         −                      sin
                   8 n=1             nπ
                                      4   4           nπ
                                                       2  2           3        n=1
                                                                                       n 3 π3           3
25. (b) m = 81
     m = 27
26. (b)
       x
28.      f (t) dt may not be periodic; for example, let f (t) = 1 + cos t.
     0
Section 10.3, page 612
                   4  sin(2n − 1)πx
                      ∞
 1. (a) f (x) =
                   π n=1       2n − 1
                                                                              
                   π 
                          ∞
                                    2                          (−1)n
 2. (a) f (x) = −                            cos(2n  − 1)x  +         sin   nx
                   4     n=1
                               (2n − 1)2 π                        n
                   L 4L  cos[(2n − 1)πx/L]
                               ∞
 3. (a) f (x) =       + 2
                   2      π n=1         (2n − 1)2
                         4  (−1)n+1
                              ∞
                   2
 4. (a) f (x) =      + 2                    cos nπx
                   3 π n=1          n2
                        2  (−1)n−1
                            ∞
                   1
 5. (a) f (x) =      +                     cos(2n − 1)x
                   2 π n=1 2n − 1
                   a0 
                           ∞
 6. (a) f (x) =       +       (an cos nπx + bn sin nπx);
                   2      n=1               
            1           2(−1)n                −1/nπ,                        n even
    a0 = , an = 2 2 , bn =
            3             nπ                     1/nπ − 4/n3 π3 ,           n odd
                            ∞                                          
                     π  1 − cos nπ                      (−1)n
 7. (a) f (x) = − +                            cos nx −          sin nx
                     4     n=1
                                     πn2                    n
    (b) n = 10; max|e| = 1.6025 at x = ±π
          n = 20; max|e| = 1.5867 at x = ±π
          n = 40; max|e| = 1.5788 at x = ±π
    (c) Not possible
                          2  1 − cos nπ
                              ∞
                   1
 8. (a) f (x) = + 2                            cos nπx
                   2 π n=1            n2
    (b) n = 10;       max|e| = 0.02020 at x = 0, ±1
          n = 20;     max|e| = 0.01012 at x = 0, ±1
          n = 40;     max|e| = 0.005065 at x = 0, ±1
    (c) n = 21
                   2  (−1)n+1
                      ∞
 9. (a) f (x) =                     sin nπx
                   π n=1       n
    (b) n = 10, 20, 40;         max|e| = 1 at x ± 1
    (c) Not possible
                          ∞                                                      
                   1  6(1 − cos nπ)                nπx 2 cos nπ            nπx
10. (a) f (x) = +                               cos      +            sin
                   2 n=1            n2 π 2           2          nπ            2
    (b) n = 10; lub|e| = 1.0606 as x → 2
         n = 20; lub|e| = 1.0304 as x → 2
         n = 40; lub|e| = 1.0152 as x → 2
    (c) Not possible
                            ∞                                                              
                    1  2 cos nπ                        2 − 2 cos nπ + n2 π2 cos nπ
11. (a) f (x) = +                          cos nπx −                                sin nπx
                    6 n=1         n2 π 2                            n3 π3
    (b) n = 10; lub|e| = 0.5193 as x → 1
         n = 20; lub|e| = 0.5099 as x → 1
         n = 40; lub|e| = 0.5050 as x → 1
    (c) Not possible
                       12  (−1)n
                            ∞
12. (a) f (x) = − 3                    sin nπx
                       π n=1 n3
    (b) n = 10; max|e| = 0.001345 at x = ±0.9735
         n = 20; max|e| = 0.0003534 at x = ±0.9864
         n = 40;         max|e| = 0.00009058 at x = ±0.9931
    (c) n = 4
13. y = (ω sin nt − n sin ωt)/ω(ω2 − n2 ), ω2  = n2
    y = (sin nt − nt cos nt)/2n2 , ω2 = n2
           ∞
14. y =         bn (ω sin nt − n sin ωt)/ω(ω2 − n2 ), ω  = 1, 2, 3, . . .
          n=1
           ∞
    y=          bn (m sin nt − n sin mt)/m(m2 − n2 ) + bm (sin mt − mt cos mt)/2m2 ,          ω=m
          n=1
          n =m
                                                                          
          4
                ∞
                            1              1                      1
15. y =                                          sin(2n − 1)t − sin ωt
          π n=1 ω2 − (2n − 1)2           2n − 1                  ω
                                              4  cos(2n − 1)πt − cos ωt
                                                   ∞
                        1
16. y = cos ωt +            (1 − cos ωt) + 2
                      2ω  2                  π n=1 (2n − 1)2 [ω2 − (2n − 1)2 π2 ]
Section 10.4, page 620
 1. Odd                                                    2. Neither
 3. Odd                                                    4. Even
 5. Even                                                   6. Neither
                     4  1 − cos(nπ/2)
                          ∞
                1                                   nπx
14. f (x) =       + 2                          cos
                4 π n=1              n2               2
                 4  (nπ/2) − sin(nπ/2)
                    ∞
                                                    nπx
    f (x) =                                     sin
                π2 n=1            n2                  2
                          2  (−1)n−1
                              ∞
                    1                            (2n − 1)πx
15. (a) f (x) =        +                    cos
                    2 π n=1 2n − 1                    2
                    ∞        
                          2                   2       nπ       nπx
16. (a) f (x) =                 − cos nπ +        sin      sin
                    n=1
                         nπ                  nπ        2        2
17. (a) f (x) = 1
                    4  sin(2n − 1)x
                        ∞
18. (a) f (x) =
                    π n=1       2n − 1
                    ∞        
                          2         nπ          2nπ                     nx
19. (a) f (x) =                 cos      + cos        − 2 cos nπ sin
                    n=1
                         nπ          3            3                      3
                         1  sin 2nπx
                             ∞
                 1
20. (a) f (x) =      −
                 2 π n=1              n
                 L 4L  cos[(2n − 1)πx/L]
                               ∞
21. (a) f (x) =       + 2
                  2       π n=1           (2n − 1)2
                 2L  sin(nπx/L)
                         ∞
22. (a) f (x) =
                   π n=1           n
                            ∞                                             
                 π       1         2π       nπ         4          nπ               nx
23. (a) f (x) = +                       sin       + 2 cos              − 1 cos
                  4      π n=1 n              2       n            2                2
                    ∞
                          (−1)n
24. (a) f (x) = 2                 sin nx
                    n=1
                             n
                 ∞                                                       
                         4n2 π2 (1 + cos nπ) 16(1 − cos nπ)                      nπx
25. (a) f (x) =                                     +                        sin
                 n=1
                                  n3 π3                        n3 π 3              2
                         16  1 + 3 cos nπ
                              ∞
                 4                                        nπx
26. (a) f (x) =      + 2                            cos
                 3 π n=1                 n2                  4
                          6  1 − cos nπ
                               ∞
                  3                                      nπx
27. (b) g(x) =       + 2                           cos
                  2 π n=1               n2                3
                  61
                       ∞
                                  nπx
         h(x) =               sin
                  π n=1 n           3
                  1  4 cos(nπ/2) + 2nπ sin(nπ/2) − 4
                          ∞
                                                                                nπx
28. (b) g(x) =       +                                                     cos
                  4 n=1                           n2 π 2                          2
                  ∞
                        4 sin(nπ/2) − 2nπ cos(nπ/2)                   nπx
         h(x) =                                                  sin
                  n=1
                                        n2 π 2                         2
                      5      ∞
                                  12 cos nπ + 4             nπx
29. (b) g(x) = −         +                            cos
                     12 n=1             n2 π2                 2
                     1  n2 π2 (3 + 5 cos nπ) + 32(1 − cos nπ)
                         ∞
                                                                                    nπx
         h(x) = −                                                              sin
                     2 n=1                         n3 π3                             2
                  1  6n2 π2 (2 cos nπ − 5) + 324(1 − cos nπ)
                          ∞
                                                                                       nπx
30. (b) g(x) =       +                                                             cos
                  4 n=1                               nπ4  4                            3
                  ∞                                                  
                          4 cos nπ + 2         144 cos nπ + 180              nπx
         h(x) =                            +                             sin
                  n=1
                                nπ                      n3 π 3                 3
40. (a) Extend f (x) antisymmetrically into (L, 2L]; that is, f (2L − x) = −f (x) for 0 ≤ x < L.
    Then extend this function as an even function into (−2L, 0).
Section 10.5, page 630
 1. xX  − λX = 0, T  + λT = 0                                2. X  − λxX = 0, T  + λtT = 0
                                  
 3. X − λ(X + X ) = 0, T + λT = 0                               4. [p(x)X  ] + λr(x)X = 0, T  + λT = 0
 5. Not separable                                               6. X  + (x + λ)X = 0, Y  − λY = 0
                −400π2 t                −2500π2 t
 7. u(x, t) = e          sin 2πx − e              sin 5πx
                    2                           2                      2
 8. u(x, t) = 2e−π t/16 sin(πx/2) − e−π t/4 sin πx + 4e−π t sin 2πx
                100  1 − cos nπ −n2 π2 t/1600
                     ∞
                                                          nπx
 9. u(x, t) =                           e             sin
                  π n=1        n                           40
                160  sin(nπ/2) −n2 π2 t/1600
                     ∞
                                                         nπx
10. u(x, t) =                         e              sin
                 π2 n=1       n2                          40
                100  cos(nπ/4) − cos(3nπ/4) −n2 π2 t/1600
                     ∞
                                                                          nπx
11. u(x, t) =                                            e            sin
                  π n=1                  n                                 40
                80  (−1)n+1 −n2 π2 t/1600
                    ∞
                                                      nπx
12. u(x, t) =                      e             sin
                 π n=1      n                          40
13. t = 5, n = 16; t = 20, n = 8; t = 80, n = 4
14. (d) t = 673.35
15. (d) t = 451.60
16. (d) t = 617.17
17. (b) t = 5, x = 33.20; t = 10, x = 31.13; t = 20, x = 28.62; t = 40, x = 25.73;
    t = 100, x = 21.95; t = 200, x = 20.31
    (e) t = 524.81
                200  1 − cos nπ −n2 π2 α2 t/400
                     ∞
                                                           nπx
18. u(x, t) =                           e              sin
                  π n=1        n                             20
    (a) 35.91◦ C         (b) 67.23◦ C            (c) 99.96◦ C
19. (a) 76.73 s         (b) 152.56 s            (c) 1093.36 s
21. (a) awxx − bwt + (c − bδ)w = 0                  (b) δ = c/b if b  = 0
      
22. X + μ X = 0,
             2
                             Y + (λ − μ )Y = 0, T  + α2 λ2 T = 0
                                      2      2
23. r R + rR + (λ r − μ2 )R = 0,  + μ2  = 0, T  + α2 λ2 T = 0
     2              2 2
Section 10.6, page 639
 1. u = 10 + 35 x                                           2. u = 30 − 54 x
 3. u = 0                                                   4. u = T
 5. u = 0                                                   6. u = T
 7. u = T(1 + x)/(1 + L)                                    8. u = T(1 + L − x)/(1 + L)
                           ∞
                                70 cos nπ + 50 −0.86n2 π2 t/400        nπx
 9. (a) u(x, t) = 3x +                             e               sin           (d) 160.29 s
                           n=1
                                        nπ                              20
10. (a) f (x) = 2x, 0 ≤ x ≤ 50; f (x) = 200 − 2x, 50 < x ≤ 100
                           x  −1.14n2 π2 t/(100)2
                                  ∞
                                                                 nπx          800     nπ    40
    (b) u(x, t) = 20 − +              cn e                  sin      , cn = 2 2 sin      −
                           5 n=1                                 100         nπ        2    nπ
    (d) u(50, t) → 10 as t → ∞; 3754 s
                                 ∞
                                            2 2          nπx
11. (a) u(x, t) = 30 − x +           cn e−n π t/900 sin        ,
                                n=1
                                                          30
            60
    cn = 3 3 [2(1 − cos nπ) − n2 π2 (1 + cos nπ)]
          nπ
                    2  −n2 π2 α2 t/L2
                           ∞
                                                      nπx
12. (a) u(x, t) = +            cn e              cos       ,
                    π n=1                               L
          
              0,                          n odd;
    cn =
              −4/(n2 − 1)π,               n even
    (b) limt→∞ u(x, t) = 2/π
                       200  −n2 π2 t/6400
                                  ∞
                                                             nπx
13. (a) u(x, t) =             +       cn e             cos          ,
                         9       n=1
                                                               40
               160
    cn = −            (3 + cos nπ)
              3n2 π2
    (c) 200/9           (d) 1543 s
                       25  −n2 π2 t/900
                                ∞
                                                          nπx
14. (a) u(x, t) =          +        cn e             cos         ,
                        6      n=1
                                                            30
           50          nπ            nπ
    cn =          sin       − sin
           nπ            3            6
                       ∞
                                         2 2 2     2      (2n − 1)πx
15. (b) u(x, t) =           cn e−(2n−1) π α t/4L sin                     ,
                                                                2L
                      n=1
           2 L                  (2n − 1)πx
    cn =            f (x) sin                   dx
           L 0                        2L
                       ∞
                                         2 2            (2n − 1)πx
16. (a) u(x, t) =           cn e−(2n−1) π t/3600 sin                   ,
                       n=1
                                                               60
                 120
    cn =                    [2 cos nπ + (2n − 1)π]
           (2n − 1)2 π2
    (c) xm increases from x = 0 and reaches x = 30 when t = 104.4.
                              ∞
                                                2 2             (2n − 1)πx
17. (a) u(x, t) = 40 +             cn e−(2n−1) π t/3600 sin                   ,
                              n=1
                                                                      60
                  40
    cn =                    [6 cos nπ − (2n − 1)π]
           (2n − 1)2 π2
              ⎧                               
              ⎪       x             ξ
              ⎪
              ⎨ T a ξ + (L/a) − 1 ,                                    0 ≤ x ≤ a,
19. u(x) =                                                                           where ξ = κ2 A2 /κ1 A1
              ⎪
              ⎩ T 1− L−x
              ⎪                                 1
                                                             ,         a ≤ x ≤ L,
                                 a ξ + (L/a) − 1
                             2 2
20. (e) un (x, t) = e−μn α t sin μn x
21. α2 v + s(x) = 0;            v(0) = T1 ,       v(L) = T2
    wt = α wxx ;
             2
                           w(0, t) = 0,         w(L, t) = 0,         w(x, 0) = f (x) − v(x)
22. (a) v(x) = T1 + (T2 − T1 )(x/L) + kLx/2 − kx2 /2
                        ∞
                                    2 2           nπx                  160 (cos nπ − 1)
    (b) w(x, t) =            cn e−n π t/400 sin         ,        cn =
                        n=1
                                                   20                          n3 π 3
23. (a) v(x) = T1 + (T2 − T1 )x/L + kLx/6 − kx3 /6L
                        ∞
                                    2 2           nπx
    (b) w(x, t) =            cn e−n π t/400 sin         ,
                        n=1
                                                   20
                                                                 
           20 3n2 π2 (3 cos(nπ) − 1) + 60 cos nπ
    cn =
            3                         n3 π 3
Section 10.7, page 652
                        8  1
                             ∞
                                           nπ       nπx          nπat
 1. (a) u(x, t) =                    sin       sin         cos
                       π2 n=1 n2            2         L            L
                                     
                        8  1
                             ∞
                                             nπ           3nπ          nπx        nπat
 2. (a) u(x, t) = 2                     sin       + sin            sin       cos
                       π n=1 n2               4             4            L           L
                       32  2 + cos nπ
                            ∞
                                                       nπx         nπat
 3. (a) u(x, t) =                                 sin        cos
                       π3 n=1          n3                L           L
                       4  ∞
                                sin(nπ/2) sin(nπ/L)                nπx         nπat
 4. (a) u(x, t) =                                            sin           cos
                       π n=1                  n                      L            L
                        8L   ∞
                                    1        nπ        nπx        nπat
 5. (a) u(x, t) =                      sin        sin        sin
                       aπ3 n=1 n3             2          L           L
                        8L   ∞
                                   sin(nπ/4) + sin(3nπ/4)                   nπx       nπat
 6. (a) u(x, t) =                                                    sin         sin
                       aπ3 n=1                    n3                         L          L
                       32L    ∞
                                    cos nπ + 2           nπx         nπat
 7. (a) u(x, t) =                                   sin        sin
                       aπ4 n=1            n4               L            L
                        4L   ∞
                                   sin(nπ/2) sin(nπ/L)                nπx         nπat
 8. (a) u(x, t) =                                               sin          sin
                       aπ2 n=1                  n2                       L          L
                 ∞
                               (2n − 1)πx             (2n − 1)πat
 9. u(x, t) =         cn sin                    cos                    ,
                                    2L                     2L
                n=1
            2 L                 (2n − 1)πx
    cn =            f (x) sin                    dx
            L 0                       2L
                       8 1
                           ∞
                                                (2n − 1)π           (2n − 1)π          (2n − 1)πx         (2n − 1)πat
10. (a) u(x, t) =                          sin                sin                  sin               cos
                       π n=1 2n − 1                    4                  2L                 2L                2L
                       512  (2n − 1)π + 3 cos nπ
                              ∞
                                                                        (2n − 1)πx          (2n − 1)πat
11. (a) u(x, t) = 4                                              sin                   cos
                        π n=1               (2n − 1)4                        2L                  2L
14. (b) φ(x + at) represents a wave moving in the negative x direction with speed a > 0.
15. Using g = 32.2 ft/s2 : (a) 249 ft/s (b) 49.8nπ rad/s
    (c) Frequencies increase; modes are unchanged.
21. r 2 R + rR  + (λ2 r 2 − μ2 )R = 0,  + μ2  = 0, T  + λ2 a2 T = 0
23. (b) an = a 1 +        (γ L /n π )
                               2 2      2 2          (c) γ = 0
                   20              nπ            2nπ            3nπ
24. (a) cn = 2 2 2 sin                  − sin           − sin
                 nπ                 2              5              5
Section 10.8, page 665
                        ∞                                                               a
                                     nπx           nπy                       2/a                     nπx
 1. (a) u(x, y) =           cn sin           sinh        , cn =                             g(x) sin        dx
                       n=1
                                       a              a               sinh(nπb/a)        0             a
                        4a  1 sin(nπ/2)
                             ∞
                                                              nπx            nπy
    (b) u(x, y) = 2                                      sin         sinh
                        π n=1 n2 sinh(nπb/a)                    a             a
                 ∞                                                                        a
                               nπx            nπ(b − y)                        2/a                      nπx
 2. u(x, y) =         cn sin          sinh                 , cn =                             h(x) sin       dx
                 n=1
                                 a                 a                     sinh(nπb/a)       0              a
                        ∞
                                         nπx         nπy  (2)
                                                                ∞
                                                                               nπx         nπ(b − y)
 3. (a) u(x, y) =           cn(1) sinh          sin        +        cn sin           sinh             ,
                                           b           b                         a              a
                       n=1
                                 b                            n=1
                                                                                            a
                   2/b                           nπy                            2/a                      nπx
    cn(1) =                          f (y) sin          dy, cn(2) =                            h(x) sin       dx
             sinh(nπa/b) 0                         b                      sinh(nπb/a) 0                    a
                             2                               2 (n π − 2) cos nπ + 2
                                                                      2 2
    (b) cn(1) =                           , cn(2) = − 3 3
                   nπ sinh(nπa/b)                          nπ             sinh(nπb/a)
                 c0  −n
                          ∞
 5. u(r, θ) =        +       r (cn cos nθ + kn sin nθ);
                  2
                        n=1
                                                           
            an 2π                                      an 2π
    cn =              f (θ) cos nθ dθ, kn =                      f (θ) sin nθ dθ
            π 0                                         π 0
                                      ∞                                     π
                                                                        2
                  6. (a) u(r, θ) =         cn r n sin nθ,     cn =                f (θ) sin nθ dθ
                                      n=1
                                                                      πan     0
                                   4 1 − cos nπ
                     (b) cn =
                                 πan         n3
                                ∞                                                       α
                                                     nπθ                                                nπθ
                  7. u(r, θ) =       cn r nπ/α sin        ,   cn = (2/α)a−nπ/α               f (θ) sin       dθ
                                n=1
                                                      α                                  0               α
                                      ∞                                              a
                                                             nπx                 2                  nπx
                  8. (a) u(x, y) =          cn e−nπy/a sin         ,     cn =            f (x) sin        dx
                                      n=1
                                                               a                 a    0               a
                                  4a2
                     (b) cn = 3 3 (1 − cos nπ)                  (c) y0 ∼   = 6.6315
                                 nπ
                                              ∞                                                               b
                                                             nπx           nπy                    2/nπ                       nπy
                 10. (b) u(x, y) = c0 +            cn cosh          cos         , cn =                            f (y) cos      dy
                                              n=1
                                                               b            b                 sinh(nπa/b)      0              b
                                       ∞
                 11. u(r, θ) = c0 +         r n (cn cos nθ + kn sin nθ),
                                     n=12π                                              2π
                               1                                                 1
                     cn =                   g(θ) cos nθ dθ, kn =                               g(θ) sin nθ dθ;
                           nπan−1      0             2π                    nπa   n−1
                                                                                          0
                     necessary condition is               g(θ) dθ = 0.
                                                     0
                                      ∞                                                                 a
                                                     nπx          nπy                       2/a                       nπx
                 12. (a) u(x, y) =          cn sin         cosh          , cn =                             g(x) sin        dx
                                      n=1
                                                       a            a                 cosh(nπb/a)        0              a
                                    4a sin(nπ/2)
                     (b) cn = 2 2
                                 n π cosh(nπb/a)
                                      ∞
                                                      (2n − 1)πx            (2n − 1)πy
                 13. (a) u(x, y) =          cn sinh                    sin                  ,
                                                            2b                    2b
                                      n=1
                                                          b
                                      2/b                                 (2n − 1)πy
                     cn =                                    f (y) sin                     dy
                           sinh[(2n − 1)πa/2b] 0                                2b
                                                     32b2
                     (b) cn =
                                 (2n − 1)3 π3 sinh[(2n − 1)πa/2b]
                                      c0 y 
                                                  ∞
                                                              nπx           nπy
                 14. (a) u(x, y) =           +       cn cos          sinh          ,
                                        2        n=1
                                                                a             a
                                a                                            a
                            2                                    2/a                            nπx
                     c0 =           g(x) dx, cn =                                   g(x) cos         dx
                           ab 0                            sinh(nπb/a) 0                         a
                                    
                                  2          a4                   24a4 (1 + cos nπ)
                     (b) c0 =         1+            , cn = − 4 4
                                  b          30                   n π sinh(nπb/a)
                                             αa 4αa  cos[(2n − 1)πx/a] cosh[(2n − 1)πz/a]
                                                             ∞
                 16. (a) u(x, z) = b +            − 2
                                              2        π n=1            (2n − 1)2 cosh[(2n − 1)πb/a]
C H A P T E R 11 Section 11.1, page 682
                  1. Homogeneous                                                  2. Nonhomogeneous
                  3. Nonhomogeneous                                               4. Homogeneous
                  5. Nonhomogeneous                                               6. Homogeneous
                                          √                  √                √                  √
                  7. (a) φn (x) = sin λn x, where λn satifies λ = − tan λ π;                                   (b) No
                     (c) λ1 ∼= 0.6204, λ2 ∼        = 2.7943
                     (d) λn ∼ = (2n − 1)2 /4 for large n
                              √                   √             √          √
    8. (a) φn (x) = cos λn x, where λn satisfies λ = cot λ;                            (b) No
       (c) λ1 ∼ = 0.7402, λ2 ∼        = 11.7349
       (d) λn ∼  = (n − 1)√2 π2 for large         n
                                         √           √              √
    9. (a) φn (x) =  √  sin    λ√ n x +    √ λ n cos   λn x, where λn satisfies
       (λ − 1) sin λ − 2 λ cos λ = 0;                      (b) No
       (c) λ1 ∼ = 1.7071, λ2 ∼        = 13.4924
       (d) λn ∼  = (n − 1)2 π2 for large n
  10. (a) For n = 1, 2, 3, . . . , φn (x) = sin μn x − μn cos μn x and λn = −μ2n , where μn satisfies
       μ = tan μ.
       (b) Yes; λ0 = 0, φ0 (x) = 1 − x
       (c) λ1 ∼ = −20.1907, λ2 ∼          = −59.6795
       (d) λn ∼  = −(2n + 1)2 π2 /4 for large n
                     2
  12. μ(x) = e−x                                               13. μ(x) = 1/x
  14. μ(x) = e−x                                               15. μ(x) = (1 − x2 )−1/2
                                       
  16. X + λX = 0, T + cT + (k + λa )T = 0               2
  17. (a) s(x) = ex              (b) λn = n2 π2 , φn (x) = ex sin√nπx; n = 1,         √2, 3, . . .
                                                        √
  18. Positive eigenvalues λ = λn , where           √     λn satisfies    λ =  2
                                                                              3
                                                                                tan 3   λL; corresponding eigen-
       functions are φn (x) = e−2x sin 3 λn x. If L = 21 , λ0 = 0 is eigenvalue, φ0 (x) = xe−2x is
       eigenfunction;if L  = 21 , λ = 0 is not eigenvalue. If L ≤ 21 ,there are no negative eigenvalues;
       if L > 21 , there is one negative eigenvalue λ = −μ2 , where μ is a root of μ = 23 tanh 3μL;
       corresponding eigenfunction is φ−1 (x) = e−2x sinh 3μx.
  19. No real eigenvalues.
  20. Only eigenvalue
                   √        √ is λ =√0; eigenfunction is φ(x) = x − 1.
  21. (a) 2 sin λ − λ cos λ = 0                       (c) λ1 ∼= 18.2738, λ2 ∼    = 57.7075
                    √         √              √
       (d) 2 sinh μ − μ cosh μ = 0, μ = −λ                              (e) λ−1 ∼= −3.6673
  24. (a) λn = μ4n , where μn is a root of sin μL sinh μL = 0, hence λn = (nπ/L)4 ;
       λ1 ∼ = 97.409/L4 , λ2 ∼        = 1558.5/L4 , φn (x) = sin(nπx/L)
       (b) λn = μn , where μn is a root of sin μL cosh μL − cos μL sinh μL = 0;
                      4
                                                               sin μn x sinh μn L − sin μn L sinh μn x
       λ1 ∼ = 237.72/L4 , λ2 ∼       = 2496.5/L4 , φn =
                                                                              sinh μn L
       (c) λn = μ4n , where μn is a root of 1 + cosh μL cos μL = 0; λ1 ∼                 = 12.362/L4 ,
            ∼
       λ2 = 485.52/L       4
           [(sin μn x − sinh μn x)(cos μn L + cosh μn L) + (sin μn L + sinh μn L)(cosh μn x − cos μn x)]
φn (x) =
                             √                          cos μn L√ + cosh μn L√           √
  25. (c) φn (x) = sin λn x, where λn satisfies cos λn L − γ λn L sin λn L = 0
       (d) λ1 ∼  = 1.1597/L2 , λ2 ∼          = 13.276/L2
  Section 11.2, page 695
                  √
    1. φn (x) = 2 sin(n − 21 )πx; n = 1, 2, . . .
                  √
    2. φn (x) = 2 cos(n − 21 )πx; n = 1, 2, . . .
                                     √
    3. φ0 (x) = 1, √ φn (x) = 2 cos nπx; n = 1, 2, . . .
                               √
                        2 cos λn x                                    √       √         √
    4. φn (x) =               2√
                                            , where λn satisfies cos λn − λn sin λn = 0
                  (1 + sin λn )
                  √
                                       1/2
    5. φn (x) = √2 ex sin nπx; n = 1, 2, . . .
                  2 2
    6. an =                  ; n = 1, 2, . . .
               (2n
                √ − 1)πn−1
               4 2(−1)
    7. an =                     ; n = 1, 2, . . .
               (2n √− 1)2 π2
                  2 2
    8. an =                  {1 − cos[(2n − 1)π/4]}; n = 1, 2, . . .
               (2n − 1)π
           √                   
          2 2 sin n − 21 π2
 9. an =                               ;    n = 1, 2, . . .
                 (n − 21 )2 π2
                                                     √                    √        √        √
In Problems 10 through 13, αn = (1 + sin2 λn )1/2 and cos λn − λn sin λn = 0.
          √         √
             2 sin λn
10. an = √                 ; n = 1, 2, . . .
                λ n αn
          √             √
             2(2 cos λn − 1)
11. an =                             ; n = 1, 2, . . .
                    λn αn
          √                 √                                          √        √
             2(1 − cos λn )                                               2 sin( λn /2)
12. an =                           ; n = 1, 2, . . .        13. an =         √           ; n = 1, 2, . . .
                   λ n αn                                                      λn αn
14. Not self-adjoint                                        15. Self-adjoint
16. Not self-adjoint                                        17. Self-adjoint
18. Self-adjoint
21. (a) If a2 = 0 or b2 = 0, then the corresponding boundary term is missing.
25. (a) λ1 = π2 /L2 ; φ1 (x) = sin(πx/L)√                       √           √
    (b) λ1 ∼= (4.4934)2 /L2 ; φ1 (x) = sin λ1 x − λ1 x cos λ1 L
    (c) λ1 = (2π)2 /L2 ; φ1 (x) = 1 − cos(2πx/L)
26. λ1 = π2 /4L2 ; φ1 (x) = 1 − cos(πx/2L)
27. (a) X  − (v/D)X  + λX = 0, X (0) = 0, X  (L) = 0;                         T  + λDT = 0
                      ∞
    (e) c(x, t) =         an e−λn Dt evx/2D sin μn x, where λn = μ2n + (v2 /4D2 );
                     n=1
                    L
          4Dμ2n          e−vx/2D f (x) sin μn x dx
    an =             0
                (2LDμ2n + v sin2 μn L)
28. (a) ut + vux = Duxx , u(0, t) = 0, ux (L, t) = 0, u(x, 0) = −c0
                      ∞
    (b) u(x, t) =          bn e−λn Dt evx/2D sin μn x, where λn = μ2n + (v2 /4D2 );
                      n=1
          8c0 D2 μ2n (2Dμn e−vL/2D cos(μn L) + ve−vL/2D sin(μn L) − 2Dμn )
    bn =
                             (v2 + 4D2 μ2n )(2LDμ2n + v sin2 (μn L))
Section 11.3, page 708
          ∞
                (−1)n+1 sin nπx
 1. y = 2
          n=1
                 (n2 π2 − 2)nπ
          ∞
                     (−1)n+1 sin(n − 21 )πx
 2. y = 2
          n=1
                [(n − 21 )2 π2 − 2](n − 21 )2 π2
           1        ∞
                                    cos(2n − 1)πx
 3. y = − − 4
           4              [(2n − 1)2 π2 − 2](2n − 1)2 π2
                    n=1
                         √                 √
           (2 cos λn − 1) cos λn x
           ∞
 4. y = 2                                  √
          n=1
                λn (λn − 2)(1 + sin2 λn )
          ∞
                sin(nπ/2) sin nπx
 5. y = 8
          n=1
                 (n2 π2 − 2)n2 π2
6–9. For each problem the solution is
                           ∞                                 1
                                   cn
                    y=                   φn (x),      cn =       f (x)φn (x) dx,       μ  = λn ,
                           n=1
                               λ n  −μ                        0
where φn (x) is given in Problems 1–4, respectively, in Section 11.2, and λn is the corresponding
eigenvalue. In Problem 8 summationstarts at n = 0.
            1             1                  1            1
10. a = − , y =                 cos πx + 2 x −                 + c sin πx
            2           2π2                 π             2
11. No solution
12. a is arbitrary, y = c cos πx + a/π2
13. a = 0, y = c sin πx − (x/2π) sin πx
17. v(x) = a + (b − a)x
18. v(x) = 1 − 23 x
                                                              
               √         4c1         4c1        1       −π2 t/4
                                                                      πx
19. u(x, t) = 2 − 2 +                      +  √       e           sin
                         π           π2           2                    2
                  √    ∞
                                   4cn                           2 2
               − 2                            [1 − e−(n−1/2) π t ] sin(n − 21 )πx,
                       n=2
                              (2n  −  1) 2 π2
            √
           4 2(−1)n+1
    cn =                    , n = 1, 2, . . .
           (2n − 1)2 π2
                                                                              √
               √    ∞
                                cn                                         cos λn x
20. u(x, t) = 2                      (e−t − e−λn t ) + αn e−λn t                 √        ,
                    n=1
                            λn − 1                                     (1 + sin2 λn )1/2
                 √         √                           √               √
                   2 sin λn                               2(1 − cos λn )
    cn = √                    √         , αn =                        √       ,
             λn (1 + sin2 λn )1/2                     λn (1 + sin2 λn )1/2
                              √        √            √
    and λn satisfies cos λn − λn sin λn = 0.
                 ∞
                       sin(nπ/2)                 2 2
21. u(x, t) = 8              4 π4
                                     (1 − e−n π t ) sin nπx
                 n=1
                          n
               √    ∞                            2 2
                          cn (e−t − e−(n−1/2) π t ) sin(n − 21 )πx
22. u(x, t) =    2                                                       ,
                    n=1
                                       (n − 21 )2 π2 − 1
            √                       √
           2 2(2n − 1)π + 4 2(−1)n
    cn =
                     (2n − 1)2 π2
23. (a) r(x)wt = [p(x)wx ]x − q(x)w, w(0, t) = 0, w(1, t) = 0,                         w(x, 0) = f (x) − v(x)
                                    4  e−(2n−1) π t sin(2n − 1)πx
                                        ∞              2 2
24. u(x, t) = x2 − 2x + 1 +
                                    π n=1                 2n − 1
                                     2
25. u(x, t) = − cos πx + e−9π t/4 cos(3πx/2)
                                             1
31–34. In all cases solution is y =               G(x, s)f (s) ds, where G(x, s) is given below.
                                              0
                
                    1 − x,             0≤s≤x
31. G(x, s) =
                    1 − s,             x≤s≤1
                
                    s(2 − x)/2,               0≤s≤x
32. G(x, s) =
                    x(2 − s)/2,               x≤s≤1
                
                    cos s sin(1 − x)/ cos 1,                  0≤s≤x
33. G(x, s) =
                    sin(1 − s) cos x/ cos 1,                  x≤s≤1
                
                    s,            0≤s≤x
34. G(x, s) =
                    x,            x≤s≤1
Section 11.4, page 719
          ∞                                       1                        4 1
                 cn          √                                    √                      √
 1. y =                 J0 ( λn x),        cn =        f (x)J0 ( λn x) dx          xJ02 ( λn x) dx,
              λ
          n=1 n
                 −   μ                              0                            0
    √                    √
      λn satisfies J0 ( λ) = 0.
                    c0  cn
                             ∞
                                                √
 2. (c) y = −           +                  J0 ( λn x);
                    μ       n=1 n
                                 λ    − μ
             1                            1                            4 1
                                                         √                            √
    c0 = 2          f (x) dx; cn =             f (x)J0 ( λn x) dx               xJ02 ( λn x) dx, n = 1, 2, . . . ;
               0                           0                                  0
    √                       √
      λn satisfies J0 ( λ) = 0.
                    1                            4 1
                               √                                   √
 3. (d) an =            xJk ( λn x)f (x) dx                 xJk2 ( λn x) dx
                     0                                 0
                 ∞                                          1                         4 1
                           cn         √                                    √                            √
    (e) y =                      Jk ( λn x), cn =                 f (x)Jk ( λn x) dx              xJk2 ( λn x) dx
                 n=1
                       λ n −   μ                              0                              0
                 ∞                                       1                         4 1
                           cn
 4. (b) y =                       P2n−1 (x), cn =               f (x)P2n−1 (x) dx               2
                                                                                             P2n−1   (x) dx
                 n=1 n
                       λ −μ                                 0                            0
Section 11.5, page 725
 1. (b) u(ξ, 2) = f (ξ + 1), u(ξ, 0) = 0, 0 ≤ ξ ≤ 2
        u(0, η) = u(2, η) = 0, 0 ≤ η ≤ 2
                  ∞                                                  1                    4 1
                                                                1
 2. u(r, t) =          kn J0 (λn r) sin λn at, kn =                      rJ0 (λn r)g(r) dr             rJ02 (λn r) dr
                  n=1
                                                              λn a 0                               0
 3. Superpose the solution of Problem 2 and the solution [Eq. (21)] of the example in the text.
                   ∞                                   1                        4 1
 6. u(r, z) =           cn e−λn z J0 (λn r), cn =             rJ0 (λn r)f (r) dr           rJ02 (λn r) dr,
                  n=1                                     0                            0
    and λn satisfies J0 (λ) = 0.
                                          ∞
 7. (b) v(r, θ) = 21 c0 J0 (kr) +              Jm (kr)(bm sin mθ + cm cos mθ),
                            2π           m=1
                   1
    bm =                         f (θ) sin mθ dθ;        m = 1, 2, . . .
            πJm (kc)  0
                              2π
                  1
    cm =                         f (θ) cos mθ dθ;        m = 0, 1, 2, . . .
           m (kc) 0
           πJ
              1                        4     1
 8. cn =         rf (r)J0 (λn r) dr             rJ02 (λn r) dr
            0
                   ∞
                                            0
                                                         1                              4 1
10. u(ρ, s) =           cn ρ Pn (s), where cn =
                             n
                                                               f (arccos s)Pn (s) ds              Pn2 (s) ds;
                   n=0                                     −1                                −1
    Pn is the nth Legendre polynomial and s = cos φ.
Section 11.6, page 734
                                                                                                  √
 1. n = 21           √                                                2. (a) bm = (−1)m+1 2/mπ                      (c) n = 20
 3. (a) bm = 2 2(1 − cos mπ)/m3√                  π3          (c) n = 1                  √
 7. (a) f0 (x) = 1              (b) f1 (x) = 3(1 − 2x)                   (c) f2 (x) = 5(−1 + 6x − 6x2 )
    (d) g0 (x) = 1,              g1 (x) = 2x − 1, g2 (x) = 6x2 − 6x + 1
 8. P0 (x) = 1, P1 (x) = x, P2 (x) = (3x2 − 1)/2, P3 (x) = (5x3 − 3x)/2
INDEX
A                               Aquifer                              one-half, 301–302, 306
Abel, Niels Henrik, 154, 230      flow in, 668, 698                   zero, 287, 296–300, 306, 326,
Abel’s formula, 154, 174, 227,  Archimedes, 206                            668, 715, 723
     243                        Asymptotic stability, see          Bessel functions, 27
  for systems of equations, 393      Stability                       J0 (x), 287, 297, 300, 306, 326,
Acceleration of convergence,    Augmented matrix, 373, 379                 716, 719, 720, 723, 727
     614                        Autonomous                              asymptotic approximation
Adams, John Couch, 473            equation, 78                                to, 300
Adams–Bashforth formula           system, 508                           Laplace transform of, 326
  fourth order, 474                                                     zeros of, 307, 716, 724
  second order, 473             B                                    J1 (x), 288, 303, 306
Adams–Moulton formula           Backward differentiation             J−1/2 (x), 302
  fourth order, 474                  formulas, 476–477               J1/2 (x), 302
  second order, 474             Backward Euler formula,              Y0 (x), 299, 300, 716, 723
Adaptive numerical method,           455–456                            asymptotic approximation
     459, 465, 471              Bashforth, Francis, 473                       to, 300
Adjoint                         Basin of attraction, 514, 526,       Y1 (x), 305
  differential equation, 157         539, 560–562                    orthogonality of, 308, 719, 720
  matrix, 369                   Beat, 214, 342–343                 Bessel inequality, 736
Advection, 698                  Bendixson, Ivar Otto, 569          Bessel series expansion, 719, 724
Airy, George Biddell, 259       Bernoulli, Daniel, 27, 92, 623,    Bifurcation diagram, 93
Airy equation, 158, 259–263,         643                           Bifurcation point, 93–94, 129,
     268, 282, 307, 327         Bernoulli, Jakob, 27, 68, 77, 356       519, 543–544, 575–577, 579
Amplitude modulation, 214       Bernoulli, Johann, 27, 68, 272,      Hopf, 575
Amplitude                            346                             pitchfork, 94
  of simple harmonic motion,    Bernoulli equation, 77               saddle-node, 93
       197                      Bessel, Friedrich Wilhelm, 296       transcritical, 94
Analytic function, 251, 266     Bessel equation of order           Boltzmann, Ludwig, 63
Angular momentum                  k, 720                           Boundary conditions, 590
  principle of, 26, 510           ν, 156, 158, 254, 280, 282, 296,   for elastic string, 644, 653
Annihilators,                          306, 683, 715                 for heat conduction equation,
  method of, 239–240              one, 287, 302–305, 307                   625, 633, 636, 671
                                                                                                   799
  for Laplace’s equation, 659      real and unequal roots, 140,     nonisolated, 506
  nonhomogeneous, 633–635,              229                         proper node of linear system,
       707                       Characteristic polynomial, 228,          499
  periodic, 695, 733                  320                           saddle point of linear system,
  separated, 686                 Chebyshev, Pafnuty L., 269, 555          400, 411, 498
Boundary layer, 487              Chebyshev equation, 269, 287,      spiral point of linear system,
Boundary value problems               683, 721                            410, 411, 501
  heat conduction equation,      Chebyshev polynomials, 269,        stability of, see Stability of
       623–642, 669–672,              721                                 critical point
       704–707                   Chemical reactions, 94           Cycloid, 68, 357
  homogeneous, 590, 685–699      Collocation
  Laplace’s equation, 658–668      method of, 729                 D
  nonhomogeneous, 590,           Competing species, 531–544       D’Alembert, Jean, 167, 623, 643,
       699–714                   Complementary solution, 177           654
  self-adjoint, 693–694, 718     Complete set of functions, 731   Dal Ferro, Scipione, 230
  singular, 714–721              Complex exponential function,    Damping force, 194, 510
  Sturm–Liouville, 685–693            159–160                     Decay, radioactive, 17
  two-point, 589–596, 679        Compound interest, 55–57         Degenerate node, see Improper
  wave equation, 643–658,        Computer use in differential          node
       673–675, 710, 722–724          equations, 23               Diagonalization
  see also Homogeneous           Conjugate matrix, 369              of homogeneous systems,
       boundary value            Continuous spectrum, 718                 426–427
       problems,                 Convergence                        of matrices, 424–426
       Nonhomogeneous              of an improper integral, 309     of nonhomogeneous systems,
       boundary value problems     of a numerical                         440–442
Brachistochrone, 27, 67                 approximation, 456        Difference equation, 122–133
Brusselator, 576                   of a power series, 247           equilibrium solution of, 123
Buckling of elastic column, 697  Convergence in mean, 731           first order, 122–133
                                 Converging solutions, 4, 13, 109   initial condition for, 122
                                 Convolution integral, 192,         iteration of, 123
C                                     350–357                       linear, 122–125
Capacitance, 202                   Laplace transform of, 350–352    logistic, 125–133
Cardano, Girolamo, 230           Cosine series, 616, 692               chaotic solutions of, 129,
Cauchy-Euler equation, 272       Cramer, Gabriel, 242                        133
Cayley, Arthur, 368              Cramer’s rule, 242                 nonlinear, 122, 125–133
Center, 410, 503, 519, 523, 530  Critical amplitude, 87             solution of, 122
Change of independent            Critical damping, 200            Differential operator, 145, 686
     variable, 165–167, 307      Critical point                   Diffusion equation, see Heat
  for Euler equation, 166, 276     approached by trajectory, 503       conduction equation
Chaotic solution                   center of linear system, 410,  Dimensionless variables, 631,
  of logistic difference                503, 519, 530                  654
       equation, 129, 133          definition of, 496, 509         Dirac, Paul A. M., 345
  of Lorenz equations, 582         for first order equation, 80    Dirac delta function, 345, 699,
Characteristic equation, 140,      improper node of linear             714
     228, 320                           system, 432, 500            Laplace transform of, 345–346
  complex roots, 158, 230          isolated, 520                  Direction field,
     repeated, 232                 node of linear system, 402,      for first order equations, 3, 5
  real and equal roots, 167, 232        411, 497                    for systems, 396
Dirichlet, Peter Gustav Lejeune, Elastic bar                           for improved Euler method,
     659, 690                      longitudinal vibrations of, 685,         463, 467
Dirichlet problem                        711                           local truncation, 457
  for circle, 663–666              transverse vibrations of, 684       mean square, 729
  for rectangle, 660–662,        Elastic column                        for modified Euler method,
        665–666                    buckling of, 697                         467
  for sector, 666                Elastic membrane                      round-off, 456, 462, 482–483
  for semi-infinite strip, 666      vibrations of, 656, 722–724         for Runge–Kutta method, 469
  for semicircle, 666            Elastic string                      Escape velocity, 58–60
Discontinuous coefficients, 78      boundary value problems for,      Euler, Leonhard, 27, 103, 299,
Discontinuous forcing function,          643–658
                                                                         622, 623, 643, 658
     78, 336–343                   derivation of wave equation,
                                                                     Euler equation, 166, 175,
Dispersion                               673–675
                                                                         272–277, 405, 418, 436, 664
  mechanical, 698                  free at one end, 653
Dispersive waves, 657                                                  change of independent
                                   general problem, 652
Divergence                         infinite length, 654–656                  variable, 166, 276
  of an improper integral, 309     justification of solution,         Euler formula for exp(it), 159,
  of a power series, 248                 649–650, 656                    233
Diverging solutions, 6, 11, 110    natural frequencies of, 647       Euler method, 102–112,
Drag force, 2, 9                   natural modes of, 647                 451–462, 479
Duffing equation, 518               nonzero initial velocity, 651,      convergence of, 112
Duffing, Georg, 518                       650–651                       global truncation error, 458,
                                   propagation of discontinuities           461
E                                        in initial data, 650          local truncation error,
Eigenfunctions, 593, 679           wavelength of, 647                       457–459
  normalized, 690                Electrical networks, 18, 202–203,   Euler–Fourier formulas,
  orthogonality of, 689, 718          324, 360, 365–367                  599–600
  series of, 692–693, 700,       Elliptic integral, 531              Euler–Máscheroni constant,
        718–719, 731             Environmental carrying                  299
Eigenvalues                           capacity, 82                   Even function, 614
  of linear homogeneous          Epidemics, 92–93                    Even periodic extension, 618
        boundary value           Equidimensional equation, 272       Exact equations, 95–99
        problems, 593, 679       Equilibrium solution, 3, 6, 13, 80,   necessary and sufficient
  of Sturm–Liouville problem          123, 496, see also Critical
                                                                            condition for existence of
     existence, 688                   point
                                                                            solutions, 27, 96
     real, 594, 596, 688         Error
                                                                       for second order equations,
     simple, 689                   for Adams–Bashforth
                                                                            157
     when positive, 696                  formula, 474
Eigenvalues of matrix, 384–388     for Adams–Moulton formula,        Exchange of stability, 94, 127
  algebraic multiplicity, 385            474                         Existence and uniqueness
  geometric multiplicity, 386      effect of step size, 458,             theorems, 22, 23
  real, 387                              482–483                       for first order equations,
  simple, 386                      for Euler method, 457–459,               69–73, 112–122
Eigenvectors of matrix, 384–388          461                             proof of, 113–119
  generalized, 433                 for Fourier series, 603–604,        for nth order linear equations,
  linear independence of, 386            611                                222
  normalized, 385                  global truncation, 456, 458,        for second order linear
  orthogonality of, 387                  482–483                            equations, 146
  for series solution of second   Fourier, Joseph, 596, 623          of Laplace’s equation, 661,
        order linear equations,   Fourier coefficients, 730                 664
        266, 293                  Fourier series, 596–623            of wave equation, 646, 651
  for systems of first order         acceleration of convergence,   Fundamental theorem of
        equations, 362                   614                           algebra, 228
Exponential growth, 79              choice of series, 618–619
Exponential matrix, 423–424,        convergence of, 608, 613       G
     428                            convergence of partial sums,   Galois, Evariste, 230
Exponential order                        603, 610                  Gamma function, 316
  functions of, 313                 cosine series, 616, 692        Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 228, 373
Exponents at the singularity,       error, 603–604, 611            Gaussian elimination, 373
     284, 289                       Euler–Fourier formulas,        Gear, C. William, 476
                                         599–600                   General solution of linear
F                                   Gibbs phenomenon, 611, 617         equations
Falling object problem, 2–4,        integration of, 599              first order, 12, 37, 74
     13–15                          orthogonality of sines and       nth order, 223
Fehlberg, Erwin, 471                     cosines, 598–599            second order, 141, 150, 162,
Feigenbaum, Mitchell, 133           Parseval equation, 613, 621,           169, 176
Feigenbaum number, 133                   657, 736                    systems of first order
Ferrari, Ludovico, 230              periodicity of sines and               equations, 392
First order ordinary differential        cosines, 597–598          Generalized function, 345
     equations                      sawtooth wave, 617, 622        Gibbs, Josiah Willard, 611
  applications of, 51–68, 78–95     sine series, 617, 691          Gibbs phenomenon, 611, 617
  Bernoulli, 77                     specialized kinds, 622         Global asymptotic stability, 527
  direction field, 3, 5              square wave, 609, 621          Gompertz, Benjamin, 90
  exact, 95–99                      triangular wave, 600, 603, 621 Gompertz equation, 90
  existence and uniqueness        Fredholm, Erik Ivar, 702         Graphical construction of
        theorems, 69–73, 112–122  Fredholm alternative theorem,        integral curves, 75
     proof of, 113–119                 702                         Gravity, 2, 58
  general solution of, 12, 37, 74 Frequency, natural               Green, George, 711
  graphical construction of         of simple harmonic motion,     Green’s function, 711–714
        integral curves, 75              197
  homogeneous, 27, 49–51            of vibrating string, 647       H
  implicit solutions, 74–75       Frobenius, Ferdinand Georg,      Half-life, 17, 62
  integrating factor for, 32, 36,      283, 368, 495               Harvesting a renewable
        99–100                    Frobenius                            resource, 91
  interval of definition, 37, 45,    method of, 283                 Heat conduction equation, 19,
        46, 73–74                 Fuchs, Lazarus Immanuel, 267,        624, 670
  linear, 27, 31–42                    495                           bar with insulated ends,
  nonlinear, 68–78                Fundamental matrix, 421–429,             635–638
  numerical solution of, see           433–434                       boundary conditions, 625, 633,
        Numerical methods         Fundamental modes of                     636, 671
  separable, 42–51                     vibration, 415                derivation of, 669–672
  series solution of, 270         Fundamental set of solutions,      with external heat source, 642
  systems of, see Systems              150, 151, 223, 392, 393       fundamental solutions of, 627,
Fitzhugh, Richard, 577            Fundamental solutions                    637
Fitzhugh–Nagumo equations,          of heat conduction equation,     nonhomogeneous boundary
     577                                 627, 637                          conditions, 633–635
  nonhomogeneous source           Hopf, Eberhard, 575                Integrating factor, 27, 32, 36,
       term, 672, 704–707         Hopf bifurcation, 575                   99–100, 157
  in polar coordinates, 632       Huxley, Andrew F., 543             Integro-differential equation,
  smoothing of discontinuities    Huygens, Christian, 356                 356
       in initial conditions, 633 Hypergeometric equation, 295          Laplace transform of, 356
  solution of fundamental                                            Interval of convergence, 248
       problem, 625–628                                              Inverse Laplace transform, 320
                                  I
  steady-state solution, 634                                            as linear operator, 322
                                  Identity matrix, 372
  transient solution, 634                                               uniqueness of, 320
                                  Implicit numerical method, 455,
Heaviside, Oliver, 312                                               Inverse matrix, 372–375
                                       474, 491
Heaviside function, 328                                              Invertible matrix, 372
                                  Implicit solutions, 74–75
von Helmholtz, Hermann, 727                                          Irregular singular point, 278,
                                  Improper integrals, 309–311
Helmholtz equation, 727                                                   295–296
                                    comparison theorem for, 311
Hereditary systems, 351                                              Iteration
                                  Improper node, 432, 500, 523
Hermite, Charles, 264, 368                                              of difference equation, 123
                                  Improved Euler method,
Hermite equation, 264, 282, 683                                         method of, 114
                                       462–468
Hermite polynomials, 264                                                see also Successive
                                  Impulse functions, 343–350
Hermitian matrix, 264, 387, 403,                                              approximations
                                  Impulse of force, 343
     424, 425, 430, 693, 711
Heun, Karl, 463                   Impulse response, 354
History of differential           Indicial equation, 284, 289, 293   J
     equations, 26–29             Inductance, 202                    Jacobi, Carl Gustav Jacob, 522
Hodgkin, Alan L., 543             Initial conditions, 12, 76, 122,   Jacobian matrix, 522, 579
Hodgkin–Huxley equations,              138, 222, 362                 Jordan, Camille, 368, 434
     543, 577                       propagation of discontinuities   Jordan form of matrix, 434–435,
Homogeneous algebraic                     for wave equation, 650          438, 439
     equations, 378                 smoothing of discontinuities     Jump discontinuity, 310, 609,
Homogeneous boundary value                for heat conduction             650
     problems, 590, 679                   equation, 633
  eigenfunctions, 593, 679        Initial value problem, 12, 45,
                                                                     K
  eigenvalues, 593, 679                138, 222, 362
                                                                     Kernel,
  singular Sturm–Liouville,         Laplace transform of,
                                                                        of convolution, 192
       714–721                            317–324
                                                                        of integral transform, 312
  Sturm–Liouville, 685–699        Inner product
                                                                     Kirchhoff, Gustav, 202
Homogeneous differential            for functions, 598, 687
                                                                     Kirchhoff’s laws, 202, 365
     equations,                     for vectors, 371
                                                                     Kronecker, Leopold, 690
  with constant coefficients, 28,  Instability
                                                                     Kronecker delta, 690
       137–145, 158–175,            of critical point, 83, 124, 126,
                                                                     Kutta, M. Wilhelm, 468
       228–236                            504, 509, 512, 558
     systems, 396–440               of numerical method,
  definition of, 138, 363                  485–490                    L
  general theory of, 145–158,       of periodic orbit, 568           Lagrange, Joseph-Louis, 28, 187,
       222–225, 390–396             see also Diverging solutions          250, 596, 643
Homogeneous first order            Integral curves, 12, 75            Lagrange’s identity, 686, 717
     differential equations, 27,  Integral equation, 113             Laguerre, Edmond Nicolas, 287
     49–51                          Volterra, 355                    Laguerre equation, 287, 683
Hooke, Robert, 193                     Laplace transform of, 355     Laplace, Pierre-Simon de, 28,
Hooke’s law, 193                  Integral transform, 312                 312, 658
Laplace transform, 309–357         Legendre equation of order α,       fundamental set of solutions,
  of convolution, 350–352              156, 158, 254, 268, 270–272,         150, 151, 223, 392, 393
  definition of, 312                    278, 281, 286, 327, 715, 721,   general solution of, 12, 28, 37,
  of derivatives, 317–318              728                                  74, 141, 150, 162, 169, 176,
  of Dirac delta function,         Legendre polynomials, 271, 721,          223, 392
        345–346                        735                             homogeneous equation with
  existence of, 312                Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 26,          constant coefficients, 28,
  of initial value problems,           68, 77, 356, 621                     137–145, 158–175,
        317–324                    Length, of a vector, 372                 228–236
  of integral equations, 355       L’Hôpital, Marquis de, 68           integrating factor, 27, 32, 36,
  of integro-differential          Liapunov, Alexandr M., 555               157
        equations, 356             Liapunov function, 558              interval of definition, 37, 69
  inverse of, 320                  Liapunov theorems, 557              nonhomogeneous equation,
  as linear operator, 314          Liapunov’s second method,                138, 175–192, 225,
  of periodic functions, 334           554–565                              236–245, 440–449
  of rectified sine wave, 335       Libby, Willard F., 62               ordinary point, 254, 266, 270,
  of sawtooth wave, 335            Liénard, Alfred-Marie, 531               281
  of square wave, 334              Liénard equation, 531, 563          particular solution, 177, 226
  for systems of equations,        Limit cycle, 568                    reduction of order, 171–172,
        446–447                    Linear dependence and                    226
                                       independence,                   self-adjoint, 158
  table of, 1, 320
                                     of functions, 223, 228            series solution of, see Series
  translation formula, 330,
                                     of vector functions, 383               solution
        332
                                     of vectors, 382–383               singular point, 254, 266,
  of unit step function, 329
                                   Linear operator, 240, 314, 322           272–281
Laplace’s equation, 28, 658–668,
                                   Linear ordinary differential        systems of, see Systems
     725
                                       equations                       undetermined coefficients, 16,
  boundary conditions, 659
                                     adjoint equation, 157                  177–186, 236–240
  in cylindrical coordinates, 668,
                                     change of independent             variation of parameters, 28,
        726                               variable, 165–167, 276,           41, 186–192, 241–245
  Dirichlet problem, 659                  307                        Linearization,
     for circle, 663–666             characteristic equation, 140,     of a nonlinear equation, 21
     for rectangle, 660–662,              228, 320                     of a nonlinear system, 522
          665–666                      complex roots, 158, 230       Liouville, Joseph, 114, 686
     for sector, 666                   complex roots, repeated,      Lipschitz, Rudolf, 121
     semi-infinite strip, 666                 232                     Lipschitz condition, 121
     for semicircle, 666               real and equal roots, 167,    Locally linear systems, 519–531
  fundamental solutions of, 661,             232                     Logarithmic decrement, 205
        664                            real and unequal roots, 140,  Logistic difference equation,
  mixed problem, 667                         229                          125–131
  Neumann problem, 659               complementary solution, 177     Logistic differential equation,
     for circle, 667                 definition of, 21, 137                80–84, 125, 532, 551
     for rectangle, 667              Euler equation, 166, 175, 272   Logistic growth, 80–84, 87–88
  in polar coordinates, 663          exact, 157                      Lorenz, Edward N., 578
  in spherical coordinates,          existence and uniqueness        Lorenz equations, 577–585
        727                               theorems, 69, 146, 222,    Lotka, Alfred J., 545
Legendre, Adrien Marie, 154,              266, 293, 363              Lotka–Volterra equations, 20,
     270                             first order, 27, 31–42                544–554
M                                Mode                               existence and uniqueness
Magnitude, of a vector, 372        natural (of vibrating string),        theorems, 70, 113, 362
Malthus, Thomas, 79                     647                         first order, 68–76
Máscheroni, Lorenzo, 299         Modified Euler formula, 467            methods of solving, 42–51,
Mathematical model, 2, 51–52     Moulton, Forest Ray, 474                    95–102
  analysis of, 52                Multiplicity of eigenvalue         linearization, 21, 522
  comparison with experiment,      algebraic, 385                   periodic solutions of, 544–554,
       52                          geometric, 386                        565–577
  construction of, 7, 15, 51     Multistep method, 472–478          y = f (t, y ), 135
Matrices, 368–390                                                   y = f (y, y ), 135
  addition of, 369               N                                Nonsingular matrix, 372
  adjoint, 369                   Nagumo, Jin-Ichi, 577            Normalization condition, 690
  augmented, 373, 379            Negative definite function,       Nullcline, 539
  conjugate, 369                     557                          Numerical dependence, 489
  diagonalizable, 424–426        Negative semidefinite function,   Numerical methods, 451–481
  eigenvalues of, 384–388, 592       557                            Adams–Bashforth formula,
  eigenvectors of, 384–388, 592  Neumann, Carl Gottfried, 659            473
  equality of, 369               Neumann problem, 659               Adams–Moulton formula, 474
                                   for circle, 667                  adaptive, 459, 465, 471
  exponential, 423–424, 428
                                   for rectangle, 667               backward differentiation
  fundamental, 421–429,
                                 Newton, Isaac, 68                       formulas, 476–477
       433–434
                                 Newton’s law                       backward Euler formula,
  Gaussian elimination, 373
                                   of cooling, 9, 17, 63                 455–456
  Hermitian, 264, 387, 403, 424,
                                   of motion, 2, 194, 365, 673      comparison of, 477
       425, 430, 693, 711
                                 Newton, Isaac, 26                  convergence of, 456
  identity, 372
                                 Node, 402, 412, 497, 520, 523,     effect of step size, 458,
  inverse, 372–375                                                       482–483
                                     see also Improper node,
  invertible, 372                                                   errors in, see Error
                                     Proper node
  Jordan form of, 434–435, 438,                                     Euler, 102–112, 451–462, 479
                                 Nonhomogeneous algebraic
       439                           equations, 378                 Heun, 463
  multiplication by a number,    Nonhomogeneous boundary            improved Euler, 462–468
       370                           value problems, 590,           modified Euler, 467
  multiplication of, 370–371         699–714                        multistep, 472–478
  noninvertible, 372               Fredholm alternative, 702        one-step, 472
  nonsingular, 372                 solution                         predictor–corrector, 475, 481
  row reduction of, 373              by eigenfunction               Runge–Kutta, 468–472, 479
  self-adjoint, 387                        expansion, 699–711       stability of, 485–490
  similar, 425                       by Green’s function,           for stiff equations, 487–488
  singular, 372                            711–714                  for systems of first order
  subtraction of, 370            Nonhomogeneous linear                   equations, 478–481
  transpose, 369                     differential equations, 138,   vertical asymptotes, 484–485
  zero, 369                          175–192, 225, 236–245,       Numerical stability, 485–490
Matrix functions, 375                353–354, 363, 440–449
May, Robert M., 131              Noninvertible matrix, 372        O
Mean convergence, 731            Nonlinear ordinary differential  Odd function, 614
Mean square error, 729               equations                    Odd periodic extension, 619
Millikan, Robert A., 66            autonomous systems, 508–585    One-step method, 472
Mixing problems, 52–54, 57–58      definition of, 21, 138          Orbital stability, 568
Order of differential equation,    Period                            Predator–prey equations, 20,
     20                              of nonlinear undamped                544–554
Ordinary differential equation            pendulum, 530              Predictor–corrector method,
  definition of, 19                   of simple harmonic motion,           475, 481
Ordinary point, 254, 266, 270             197                        Proper node, 499, 523
  at infinity, 281                  Periodic boundary conditions,
Orthogonality                           695, 733                     Q
  of Bessel functions, 308, 719,   Periodic forcing terms, 612       Quasi frequency, 199
        720                        Periodic functions, 597           Quasi period, 199
  of Chebyshev polynomials,          derivative of, 606
        721                          fundamental period, 597         R
                                     integral of, 606                Rössler equations, 585
  of eigenfunctions of
                                     Laplace transform of, 334       Rössler, Otto E., 585
        Sturm–Liouville
                                     linear combination of, 597      Radioactive decay, 17, 62
        problems, 689, 718
                                     product of, 598                 Radiocarbon dating, 62
  of functions, 598                                                  Radius of convergence, 248, 267
  of Legendre polynomials,           sine and cosine, 598
                                   Periodic solutions of             Ramp loading, 338
        271, 721, 735                                                Rate function, 5
                                        autonomous systems,
  of sine and cosine functions,                                      Rate of growth (decline), 5, 79
                                        544–554, 565–577
        598–599                                                        intrinsic, 80
                                   Periodicity of sine and cosine
  of vectors, 372                                                    Rayleigh, Lord, 575
                                        functions, 597–598
Orthonormal set, 690, 728                                            Rayleigh equation, 575
                                   Phase line, 81
Overdamped motion, 200                                               Rectified sine wave, 335
                                   Phase plane, 206, 396, 496
                                                                     Recurrence relation, 256, 283,
                                   Phase plot, 206, 218
                                                                          284, 289
                                   Phase portrait, 396, 496
P                                                                    Reduction of order, 171–172, 226
                                   Phase, of simple harmonic
Parseval, Marc-Antoine, 613                                          Reduction to systems of
                                        motion, 197
Parseval equation, 613, 621,                                              equations, 360
                                   Picard, Charles-Émile, 114
     657, 736                                                        Region of asymptotic stability,
                                   Picard
Partial differential equation                                             514, see also Basin of
                                     method of, 114                       attraction
  definition of, 19
                                   Piecewise continuous function,    Regular singular point, 277–281
  see also Heat conduction
                                        310, 608                       at infinity, 281
        equation, Laplace’s        Pitchfork bifurcation, 94
        equation, Wave equation                                      Resistance, electric, 202, see also
                                   Poincaré, Henri, 495, 569              Damping force
Partial fraction expansion, 319,   Poincaré–Bendixson Theorem,       Resonance, 211, 215, 342–343
     322, 323, 327                      569                          Riccati, Jacopo Francesco, 134
Particular solution, 177, 226      Poiseuille, Jean Louis Marie, 595 Riccati equation, 134
Pendulum equation                  Poiseuille flow, 595               Rodrigues, Benjamin Olinde,271
  generalized nonlinear            Population dynamics, 78–88        Rodrigues’ formula, 271
        undamped, 563              Positive definite function, 557    Rosenzweig-MacArthur
  linear undamped, 21              Positive semidefinite function,         equations, 553, 576
  nonlinear damped, 510–512,            557                          Round-off error, 456, 462,
        521, 523–527, 529          Potential equation, 658–668,           482–483
  nonlinear undamped, 21, 25,           see also Laplace’s           Row reduction, 373
        26, 518, 528–529, 555–556,      equation                     Runge, Carl David, 468
        559–560, 563               Power series, properties of,      Runge–Kutta method, 468–472,
     period, 530                        247–251                           479
S                                       differ by integer, 286, 292,     basin of attraction, 514, 526,
Saddle point, 400, 412, 498, 523             294, 301–305                       539, 560–562
Saddle-node bifurcation, 93        Shift of index of summation,          of critical point, 504, 509–510,
Saturation level, 82                    251–252                                 519, 558
Sawtooth wave, 335, 617, 622       Similar matrices, 425                 exchange of, 94, 127
Scalar product, see Inner          Similarity transformation, 425        global asymptotic stability,
     product                       Simple eigenvalues, 386                      527
Schaefer model for fish             Simple harmonic motion, 197           Liapunov theorems, 557
     population, 91                Simply connected region, 96           for linear systems, 504, 519
Schrödinger, Erwin, 345            Simpson, Thomas, 469                  for locally linear systems, 523
Self-adjoint                       Simpson’s rule, 469                   of numerical method, 485–490
  boundary value problem,          Sine series, 617, 691                 orbital, 568
        693–694, 718               Singular matrix, 372                  region of asymptotic stability,
  equation, 158                    Singular point, 254, 266, 272–281            514
  matrix, 387                        irregular, 278, 295–296             semistable, 89, 568
Separable equations, 27, 42–51       regular, 272–281                    stable, 504, 512, 558, 568
Separated boundary conditions,          at infinity, 281                      definition of, 509
     686                           Sink                                  unstable, 83, 124, 126, 504, 512,
Separation constant, 626, 636,       nodal, 497                                 558, 568
     645, 660, 679, 723              spiral, 501                             definition of, 509
                                                                             see also Diverging solutions
Separation of variables, 623       Slope field, see Direction field
                                                                       Stairstep diagram, 127
  further remarks, 721–728         Solution of ordinary differential
                                                                       Star point, 499
  for heat conduction equation,         equation, 22
                                                                       Steady state solution, 64, 210, 634
        626, 636                     general solution of linear
                                                                       Stefan, Jozef, 63
  for Laplace’s equation, 660              equations, 12, 37, 74, 141,
                                                                       Stefan-Boltzmann radiation law,
     in polar coordinates, 663             150, 162, 169, 176, 223
                                                                             63
  for wave equation, 645                of systems, 392
                                                                       Step functions, 328
     in polar coordinates, 726       implicit, 74–75
                                                                       Stiff equations, 487–488
Separatrix, 514, 526, 538            of systems of equations, 362      Stokes, George Gabriel, 66
Series of eigenfunctions,          Source                              Stokes’ law, 66
     692–693, 699, 700, 718–719,     nodal, 497                        Strange attractor, 582
     731                             spiral, 501                       Strutt, John William, see
Series solution                    Spiral point, 410, 411, 501, 519,         Rayleigh, Lord
  existence theorem for, 266,           523                            Sturm, Charles-François, 686
        293                        Spring-mass system, 192–219,        Sturm–Liouville boundary
  first order equations, 270             324, 419                             value problems, 685–699
  indicial equation, 284, 289, 293   three springs, two masses, 359,     eigenfunctions orthogonal,
  near an ordinary point,                  365, 412–416, 420                    689
        254–272                      two springs, two masses, 234        eigenvalues
  near a regular singular point,   Square integrable function, 731           real, 688
        282–296                    Square wave, 334, 609, 621                simple, 689
  recurrence relation, 256, 283,   Stability                             nonhomogeneous, 700–704
        284, 289                     asymptotic, 83, 124, 126, 504,      self-adjointness of, 694, 718
  when roots of indicial                   512, 558, 568                 singular, 714–721
        equation                        definition of, 510                    continuous spectrum, 718
     are equal, 286, 292, 294,          see also Converging            Successive approximations
          297–301                            solutions                   method of, 114, 428
Superposition principle, 147,          nonhomogeneous, Laplace      Uniqueness theorems, see
    364, 391, 652, 722                      transform of, 446–447        Existence and uniqueness
Sylvester, James, 368                  superposition of solutions,       theorems
Systems                                     391                     Unit step function, 328
  of differential equations, 19        undetermined coefficients,      Laplace transform of, 329
    autonomous, 508                         442–443
    existence and uniqueness           variation of parameters,     V
          theorem, 362                      443–445                 van der Pol, Balthasar, 570
    initial conditions, 362         of linear algebraic equations,  van der Pol equation, 570–573
    linear, 363                           378–381, 590              Variation of parameters, 28, 41,
    nonlinear, 363                                                       186–192, 241–245
    numerical solution of,        T                                   for systems of equations,
          478–481                 Tangent line method, see Euler           443–445
    reduction to, 360                  method                       Vectors, 369, 606
    solution of, 362              Tautochrone, 356–357                inner product, 371
  of first order linear equations, Taylor, Brook, 250                  length, 372
       390–449, 495–507           Taylor series, 159, 250             linear dependence and
    definition of, 363               for functions of two variables,        independence of,
    diagonalization, 426–427,             467, 521                         382–383
          440–442                 Telegraph equation, 674, 683,       magnitude, 372
    Euler, 405, 418, 436               711                            multiplication of, 371
    existence and uniqueness      terminal velocity, 4                orthogonality, 372
          theorem, 363            Thermal diffusivity, 624, 671     Verhulst, Pierre F., 80
    fundamental matrix,           Threshold models, 85–88           Verhulst equation, 80
          421–429, 433            Torricelli, Evangelista, 61       Vibrations
    fundamental set of            Torricelli’s principle, 61          of elastic bar, 684–685, 711
          solutions, 392, 393     Trajectories, 362, 396, 496,        of elastic membrane, 656,
    general solution of, 392           503–504, 515–516                    722–724
    homogeneous, 363, 390–396       almost linear systems, 523        of elastic string, 643–658,
    homogeneous with                linear systems, 496–504                673–675
          constant coefficients,     locally linear systems, 524          natural modes of, 647
          396–440                 Transcritical bifurcation, 94       of spring-mass system,
    homogeneous with              Transfer function, 354                   192–219, 324, 419
          constant coefficients,   Transfer matrix, 446                of three spring, two mass
          complex eigenvalues,    Transient solution, 64, 209, 634         system, 359, 365, 412–416,
          408–420, 501–503        Translation of a function, 330           420
    homogeneous with              Transpose of a matrix, 369          of two spring, two mass
          constant coefficients,   Triangular wave, 600, 603, 621           system, 234
          real and unequal        Truncation error                  Volterra, Vito, 545
          eigenvalues, 396–407,     global, 456, 482–483            Volterra integral equation, 355
          497–498                   local, 457                        Laplace transform of, 355
    homogeneous with
          constant coefficients,   U                                 W
          repeated eigenvalues,   Undetermined coefficients, 16,     Wave equation, 19, 643, 710,
          429–440, 498–500             177–186, 236–240                  722–724
    nonhomogeneous, 363,            for systems of equations,         boundary value problems for,
          440–449                         442–443                          643–658
derivation of, 673–675          nonzero initial velocity, 651, Wronski, Jósef Maria Hoëné-,
dispersive waves, 657                650–651                       149
fundamental solutions of, 646,  in polar coordinates, 722,     Wronskian, 149, 223
                                                                 Abel’s formula for, 154, 227
     651                             726
                                                                 for systems of equations, 392
general problem, 652            see also Elastic string
                                                                   Abel’s formula, 393
in infinite medium, 654–656     Wave velocity, 643, 654, 674
justification of solution,      Wavelength                      Y
     649–650, 656               of vibrating string, 647       Yield, maximum sustainable, 91
                              Elementary Laplace Transforms
             f (t) = L−1 { F(s)}                        F(s) = L{ f (t)}              Notes
                                      1
 1. 1                                    ,         s>0                           Sec. 6.1; Ex. 4
                                      s
                                          1
 2. eat                                         ,          s>a                   Sec. 6.1; Ex. 5
                                      s−a
                                        n!
 3. t n ,     n = positive integer            ,          s>0                     Sec. 6.1; Prob. 31
                                      sn+1
                                      (p + 1)
 4. t p ,        p > −1                                ,      s>0                Sec. 6.1; Prob. 31
                                           sp+1
                                            a
 5. sin at                                         ,        s>0                  Sec. 6.1; Ex. 7
                                      s 2 + a2
                                            s
 6. cos at                                         ,        s>0                  Sec. 6.1; Prob. 6
                                      s 2 + a2
                                            a
 7. sinh at                                        ,        s > |a|              Sec. 6.1; Prob. 8
                                      s 2 − a2
                                            s
 8. cosh at                                        ,        s > |a|              Sec. 6.1; Prob. 7
                                      s 2 − a2
                                                 b
 9. eat sin bt                                              ,     s>a            Sec. 6.1; Prob. 13
                                      (s − a)2 + b2
                                              s−a
10. eat cos bt                                              ,     s>a            Sec. 6.1; Prob. 14
                                      (s − a)2 + b2
                                              n!
11. t n eat ,    n = positive integer                    ,     s>a               Sec. 6.1; Prob. 18
                                      (s − a)n+1
                                      e−cs
12. uc (t)                                    ,          s>0                     Sec. 6.3
                                         s
13. uc (t)f (t − c)                   e−cs F(s)                                  Sec. 6.3
14. ect f (t)                         F(s − c)                                   Sec. 6.3
                                      1         s
15. f (ct)                               F           ,        c>0                Sec. 6.3; Prob. 25
                                      c         c
     t
16.       f (t − τ)g(τ) dτ            F(s)G(s)                                   Sec. 6.6
       0
17. δ(t − c)                          e−cs                                       Sec. 6.5
18. f (n) (t)                         sn F(s) − sn−1 f (0) − · · · − f (n−1) (0) Sec. 6.2; Cor. 6.2.2
19. (−t)n f (t)                       F (n) (s)                                  Sec. 6.2; Prob. 29
